High Street on Hudson is an adventurous and often exciting restaurant trying extremely hard to pass for an ordinary West Village cafe. “Philly spinoff providing house-made breads & pastries, elevated sandwiches, coffee & cocktails,” is Google’s capsule summary. The description is factual to the last ampersand, yet it doesn’t go past the camouflage this place wrapped around itself when it sidled into town in December.

What is missing, what you may miss at first if you came for breakfast or lunch, the only meals High Street on Hudson served in its first few weeks of life, is the high level of intelligence the kitchen applies to everything it does from morning through evening.

The chef, Eli Kulp, is unmistakably trying to make his mark in New York after making his name in Philadelphia. (He was traveling between the two cities last year when his Amtrak train derailed, leaving him with serious spinal injuries.) At dinner, the time when chefs make their big statements, the menu turned out to be full of small oddities and unexpected ripples of flavor when it was finally unveiled in January. Yet his restaurant doesn’t just put on a show at night and wait for you to be impressed. Mr. Kulp and his business partner, Ellen Yin, understand that coffee and a great pastry can be just as meaningful before noon as an artfully plated <dish>duck breast</dish> is after dark.

Restaurants that aim to be useful and interesting all day long are becoming more common in Los Angeles and other cities; New York could use more of them.

Continue reading the main story
Restaurant Review
Pete Wells, The New York Times's restaurant critic, reviews new and notable restaurants in New York City.
Culinary Clashes End in Harmony at Chinese Tuxedo
FEB 14
White Gold Butchers Slices to the Point: Meats Cooked Simply
FEB 7
The New Chumley’s Raises the Culinary Bar
JAN 31
Glimpses of a Gilded Past at Fowler & Wells
JAN 24
Slurping Solo, in Sweet Isolation, at Ichiran in Brooklyn
JAN 17
See More »

RECENT COMMENTS

Letitia Jeavons March 15, 2016
Does this mean Eli Kulp is doing well enough to cook? Something I read only a few months after the accident made it sound like Mr. Kulp...
BostonBestEats March 14, 2016
Great to see Eli doing better after that terrible train wreck. And a Philly-inspired restaurant getting noticed in NYC! "High Street on...
ADH3 March 11, 2016
I sure have to disagree about the concept of being open all day and night -- this has been practiced for many years by restaurants that are...
SEE ALL COMMENTS  WRITE A COMMENT
The view into the windows from Hudson Street says bakery: You can see bread on shelves, a squarish seeded rye and a round buckwheat loaf with dried cherries inside. Baked by Alex Bois, they have the roughness and flavor of whole grains, the complicated taste of slow-rising dough, and the kind of dark, thick, crackling crust you want to feel between your teeth.

In a glass case by the door are a few of Samantha Kincaid’s pastries, fewer as the day goes on. The neighbors are especially fond of carrying off the round doughnuts rolled in spiced sugar and filled with salty cider caramel.

Unlike Sadelle’s, which also has a retail bakery up front, High Street on Hudson puts virtually all of its pastries on the daily menus. An ideal breakfast could be made of coffee and the witty red-eye Danish, a flaky golden swirl with warm country ham over a bull’s-eye of bittersweet pastry cream made with espresso.

Or it could revolve around a black bialy. This oddball creature, dark with squid ink and strewn with sesame seeds, is soft and chewy, with pickled peppers and a mound of tart, uncreamy <dish>whitefish salad</dish> pressed into its divot.

NYT FoodRestaurant Reviews
Follow On 
Cooking at breakfast takes the form of <dish>egg sandwiches</dish>. My choice of these is the Bodega, an incongruous name for a countrified affair of <dish>flattened sage sausage</dish> and Cheddar on a biscuit with a mule kick of black pepper. Like the other sandwiches, the Bodega arrives alongside a grilled hot pepper on an irregular block of wood. This is both affected and counterproductive; a boring old plate would do a better job of keeping food off the table. (What’s going to happen to all these fancy boards once they stop being cool and everybody admits what a pain they are?)

I am tempted to jump from breakfast straight to dinner out of cowardice. I would rather not have to say that lunch is the weakest meal of the day. The <dish>sandwiches</dish> are the trouble. The pastrami is a buzz kill, an inert mass of cold pink meat sliced too thickly on too much rye. Another is called the Best Grilled Cheese Ever. It isn’t. (Granted, calling a <dish>sandwich</dish> the Best Grilled Cheese Ever is like naming your child Jesus Buddha.)

If a place is going to go to the trouble of baking those first-rate breads, it should keep a closer eye on the laws of contrast and proportion that mean success or failure in the sandwich universe. Sandwich engineering is a skill of its own, or maybe an instinct.

Cooking
Daily inspiration, delicious recipes, and other updates from Sam Sifton and The New York Times, right to your inbox.


Enter your email address
 Sign Up

Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services.

SEE SAMPLE PRIVACY POLICY
When it gets dark, High Street on Hudson doesn’t entirely pack up the bakery. One of Mr. Kulp’s more clever moves is to integrate dinner into the overall program with a few breads and some of the regionally grown grains they’re made from.

Vollkornbrot, a dark German rye riddled with sunflower seeds, is a wonderful thing to eat when it’s buttered and griddled and spread with <dish>rutabaga hummus</dish>, which could double as <dish>vegetarian chicken-liver pâté</dish>. Slices of anadama, a venerable New England cornmeal loaf sweetened with molasses, are topped with very rich, very tender, <dish>very smoky eel</dish>.

I was happily surprised that sunflower seeds cooked into a creamy mock risotto could be so appealing. A less pleasant surprise was the portion size, too small to be served as a separate course to our table of four. Apart from the breads, the menu is a longish list under a single category, “To Share.” The kitchen decides what to send out when, and it doesn’t always make the right call.

Tempura-style broccoli is at the start of that list and, ideally, at the start of your meal. Impressively crisp, it gets a refreshing assist from pickled wood-ear mushrooms and an exhilarating dribble of spicy chowchow relish.

Halfway down the menu you come to the <dish>pastas</dish>. Do not, for any reason short of an allergy, ignore the bucatini with squid and mussels. Mr. Kulp, who was chef de cuisine at Torrisi Italian Specialties before he moved to Philadelphia, knows what he is doing in the pasta department. The bucatini are flavored with seaweed, a terrific idea, and the plate is finished with <dish>lobster</dish> bottarga shaved into rose-colored petals, an even more terrific idea. It may be the finest use of lobster coral anybody has come up with.


14
COMMENTS
Toward the bottom of the menu are what used to be called main courses. Arctic char is sauced with a very smart remix of a gribiche; the <dish>eggs</dish> are pickled for extra snap. And while the phrase “soured grains” does not make the heart go pitter-pat, I could work up some affection for the thing it described, a tart, almost refreshing porridge served under fat slices of duck breast with especially flavorful skin.

You may expect a place serving soured grains to go salty and savory with its desserts. And you’d be correct. I like them, mostly, but I’d rather have a piece of the spiced kabocha cake, or the cream puff, with its soft spill of Meyer-lemon cream, followed by a cookie offered on a tray by a smiling woman at the door.
