Bruno Pizza
Italian, Pizza
204 East 13th Street,
212-598-3080
has a few problems. It’s only been open since July, so maybe it will work them out eventually. I
hope so. I don’t want to convict the restaurant’s chefs and owner for these problems because the
real killer, as O. J. Simpson would say, is other people. More accurately, it’s a small group of
people like me whose approval can lift some restaurants from the teeming primordial swamp of
contenders, and whose premature praise and willingness to play down discomfort and inconvenience
enable problems like Bruno’s. These enablers have given the unusual, original pizzas and visually
arresting appetizers at Bruno more media attention than you may expect for a fledgling East Village
pizzeria whose chefs have never run a full restaurant kitchen. In the middle of September, New York
magazine’s website   claiming that Bruno’s $18 plate of <dish>bread and fermented mozzarella</dish> “might just
be the city’s most impressive new bread course.” This was a scoop; nobody else had written about the
bread. It may well be that nobody else had tasted the bread, either. It wasn’t on the menu then. An
infrequent special, it wasn’t on the menu the last time I ate there, about a week ago. Rave reviews
of items that have yet to be sold to a paying customer are less rare than you may think. A
restaurant that hopes to get a respectable P.R. push out of the gate will often make a few of its
more striking dishes available for advance photographs and tastings. As soon as the doors open,
waves of impressions from bloggers, Yelpers, Instagrammers and others begin to pound the shoreline.
Two critics from Eater were among the earliest customers of David Chang’s Fuku, and their “first
reactions”   about three hours after the first chicken sandwich was sold. There are reasons, though,
for paid critics to give a new place like Bruno time to settle in. <dish>Pizza</dish> is not as simple as it
appears. Getting it right takes time. Bruno’s chefs, Justin Slojkowski and Dave Gulino, mill the
flour in the basement from whole New York State wheat berries, and ferment it slowly with a
sourdough starter. I don’t know another local pizzeria that goes to these lengths, and you won’t
taste a crust like Bruno’s anywhere else. What the raised perimeter lacks in crunch it makes up for
in earthy, whole-grain flavor. But the crust has been slightly different each time I’ve tried it.
Most recently, it had a uniform fluffiness, a cushiony yet chewy softness, without big air pockets
or blisters. When it comes to toppings, Mr. Slojkowski and Mr. Gulino don’t play it safe, either.
Their nearest approach to a classic pie is their margherita, with a sauce that incorporates sweet,
juicy garlic and some fermented tomatoes. These give it a fizzy tang along with a slight saltiness.
It takes some getting used to, but it interacts energetically with the white slicks of dense, rich
mozzarella. Other pies verged on baked salads, with varying degrees of success. The most satisfying
was the one with shavings of country ham and sliced peaches punctuated by melted blots of soft,
grassy cheese made from raw cow’s milk. The most confounding started with a base of <dish>ricotta</dish>, thin
rounds of zucchini and a carrot-top pesto that reminded me distantly of za’atar. A mound of raw,
crunchy, long-stemmed greens interwoven with bottarga shavings was heaped on top. I studied this
foliage for a way in. I tried biting a slice and munched like a cow, while leaves and stems flapped
from my lips. I tried eating the greens with a fork. I couldn’t escape the feeling that I had been
served at least two different dishes at once. The appetizers were more perplexing. As a lot, they
looked more interesting than they were. Seared scallops got almost no assistance from a bright
orange raw-carrot sauce. It didn’t have the sweetness of cooked carrots, which might have underlined
the shellfish’s own sweetness. Maybe the chefs just like the color. This seemed to be the case with
a salad of pink watermelon with green needles of okra. The flavors stayed stubbornly separate, the
okra contributing only its interior sliminess. Inexplicably, the chefs also spurted a gray dribble
of soaked basil seeds on the plate. It was a real goo party. Then there was the squid, nested above
roasted Hatch chiles inside little cups of charred onion. Nothing blended. The undercooked onions
were too crunchy, the peppers too dominant. The squid cups looked cool, though, which seemed to be
the whole point of this and other dishes. Bruno is one of many new places where building flavor
seems less important than composing an image that can rocket straight to the digital billboards.
It’s hard to explain how great something tastes, but easy to show how great it looks, and in the
short run, contemporary food media rewards the latter. Uncomfortable restaurant seats have become an
accepted signifier of edgy seriousness. Seating at Bruno is divided into a long row of tables with
chairs and banquettes, and a counter where you sit on upended whitewashed crates that offer no
footrest or back support. After squirming on one of these, I knew why prisoners forced to kneel for
hours will confess to anything. “The dishes will come out as they’re ready,” our server on another
night had said, which sounded like a good thing: lots of food at once! But what he had meant was
that it would trickle out slowly, one plate at a time deposited in the middle of the table. One of
my companions wanted only her pasta, sitting out the other dishes. It came out last, after a
15-minute pause, only it wasn’t what she had ordered. There was another long wait for the right dish
to show up. I’ve put up with this style of service in other restaurants, but the absurdity of it
finally hit me here because this was supposed to be a pizzeria. Mr. Slojkowski and Mr. Gulino first
came to attention serving tasting menus by night inside an East Village coffee shop. What the
critics who lavish praise on tasting menus, including me, never tell you is that it is one of the
easiest ways to run a kitchen. Serving a full restaurant where everybody orders different things at
different times is much, much trickier. It takes speed and organizational skills that seemed to
elude the chefs at Bruno on this night. No doubt this will come with practice. The chefs may
eventually prepare plates that taste as interesting as they look. They might start by eating their
own cooking blindfolded. The rest of us, the critics and bloggers and Yelpers, might try the
reverse. Maybe it’s time to take off our blindfolds.
