Bolivian Llama Party
Latin American
1000 Eighth Avenue,
347-395-5481
Call a salteña an empanada at your own risk. At first glance, it may look like one, a pouch of
stuffed dough with a ruffly edge. There the resemblance ends, or so insist Alex, Patrick and David
Oropeza, three brothers who run   in the underground   at Columbus Circle. First, the dough is
sweet, touched with cane sugar and ají amarillo, an Andean chile that tastes of mango, raisins and a
steady onslaught of sun. The dough is thicker than an empanada’s, too, crunchy on the outside and
chewier as you bite in, like an underbaked cookie. <dish>Salteñas</dish> are plumper than empanadas and served
balanced on the base with the seam at the top, a hardy braid that bulges like a prehistoric spine.
In Bolivia, this is supposed to be black, like the waist-length braids of the country’s indigenous
women, worn under bowler hats. “Here, people just think it looks burned,” said Patrick Oropeza, the
chef, who stops the baking at dark gold. Most important is that salteñas are heavy with jigote, a
soupy stew cooked for days, lush with broken-down cow’s foot and kindled by roasted chile paste.
This is left to set, then cut into wobbly cubes and sealed inside the dough. No air pockets are
allowed, lest the salteñas, mid-baking, explode. As is done with <dish>Chinese soup dumplings</dish>, it is
safest to nibble off one end to let the steam out, then sip the liquid until its level descends
enough that you can eat without spilling. Among Bolivians, this is apparently something of a game;
whoever spills first has to pay the bill. The brothers claim to have sampled every salteña in
Bolivia — including the ones they deem the best, in their parents’ hometown, Cochabamba — before
finalizing their recipes, which are part research, part innovation. One $6 salteña is filled with
chopped flank steak, cushioned with ground top round and suffused with ají panca, a mild chile whose
flavor suggests smoked blackberry jam. Another comes with <dish>chicken breast</dish> that seems to have passed
several lifetimes simmering with chicken ends and bones, the earthiness of the stock leavened by ají
amarillo. The most expensive, at $8, is swollen with <dish>Bolivian fricasé</dish>, a fervent soup of pork upon
pork (belly, shoulder, hocks) that tastes like the cloud over a smoking grill. All are as
satisfyingly sweet and salty as someone up at 2 a.m. and starving would wish. The exception is an
underseasoned quinoa-mushroom version in which agar-agar supplants cow’s foot, giving the jigote a
slightly viscous texture, oddly reminiscent of American chop suey. In Bolivia, salteñas often
contain half a hard-boiled egg (Patrick adds just a sliver) and an olive with the pit still inside,
which you will not find here. And Patrick interprets <dish>llajua</dish>, the accompanying hot sauce, as more
chutney than salsa, leaving out tomatoes and building on a base of quilquiña, an Andean cousin to
cilantro. A word of warning: Scotch bonnets are also present, in force. The brothers, who live
within 10 blocks of one another near the border of Brooklyn and Queens (where they grew up), started
selling salteñas at street fairs in 2012, when Patrick and David were trying to raise money to cut a
demo for their prog-rock band. They eventually secured a stall at Smorgasburg, in Brooklyn, and a
spot on the boardwalk at Rockaway Beach in Queens. At the Columbus Circle outpost, which opened in
April, the rest of the menu is a bit desultory, like a fine-enough kale and arugula salad littered
with quinoa, and balls of yuca and cheese, hard and dense. But the <dish>sandwiches de chola</dish> are
excellent, spiritual kin to Vietnamese banh mi, with a crucial layer of pickled carrots and onions
brined in chicha, a beer of fermented maize. Every corner of the stand’s bright yellow ceiling is
graffitied with exultations (“Delicioso”) and drawings of salteñas with human faces, dashing past
city landmarks and riding the subway under ads for “zit cream.” The brothers’ unofficial slogan,
born late one night from the mutterings of a drunk customer, is a direct challenge to empanadas, an
invitation to a throwdown. The words, unprintable here, are emblazoned in hot pink on pins for sale
at the counter.
