Achilles Heel
American
180 West Street ,
347-987-3666
In its more peaceful hours, 
, a revived waterfront bar with a painted stone facade in the Greenpoint section of Brooklyn, reminds me of 
.
At both places, you can rub the winter out of your hands near a hot stove (fueled by coal at McSorley’s, firewood at Achilles) whose feet are propped on beat-up floorboards. Neither spot is in any hurry, and time there moves at a pace that is decidedly prehashtag. Their light has a faraway, amber quality you could call cheerful gloom. They are among the most soothing places in the city to cradle a glass while the day shortens and slips into the night.
One area where the two diverge is food. John McSorley, who founded his East Village saloon in 1854, liked to eat whole raw onions like apples. Possibly for this reason, the kitchen at McSorley’s has always taken a rough-and-ready approach. At Achilles Heel, the short menu is something else: thoughtful, engaging, subtle and intimate.
It’s less saloon cooking than wine-bar food. You can knock back some Muscadet and oysters with, instead of a garden-variety mignonette, a few thick, concentrated drops of a dressing that is intensely lemony but not sour. Or you can chase a mouthful of oloroso with a soft bite of a sheep’s milk cheese called Puits d’Astier, wrapped in a charred leaf of cabbage and griddled. It’s a wonderful way to eat cheese.
As at a wine bar in France, there are <dish>tartines</dish>, which everybody in New York decided one recent day to call “toasts.” <dish>Fried bread</dish> showed through beneath sheets of sweetly melting lardo, uncannily good and flecked with Sichuan peppercorn. Toast jutted out of a bowl of fleshy, delicious black trumpet mushrooms in their own broth. Excellent, densely seeded bread came alongside fluke with pickled chiles; I’d expected raw fluke, but it had been cured in salt and then restored, like <dish>bacalao</dish>, into an intensely flavored mash.
The chef, Lee Desrosiers, cooks on induction burners in a space that looks just big enough to slice a baguette. In fact, it’s the kitchen of a bar that was not supposed to have one. Andrew Tarlow, who restored Achilles Heel decades after the dockworkers who used to drink there heard the final last call, had the spot retrofitted last summer, in its third year of operation.
From his butcher shop, 
, he plucked Mr. Desrosiers, a meat cutter who had restaurant experience. His menu isn’t especially meaty, but Mr. Desrosiers will use his knives in ways that the longshoreman who used to drink here probably didn’t. <dish>Minced pork rib</dish> became a meditation on the Thai dish larb, with balls of sticky rice and a sauce of fresh green herbs.
Early one night, Mr. Desrosiers put a plate of guinea hen galantine down on the bar. “Here,” he told the bartenders, “I want you guys to try this.” They took exploratory pecks at the thick wheels of pale pink meat broken by white windowpanes of fat, then they set upon the plate like vultures. I did the same when I got mine, swabbing it in a purple blob of <dish>chopped pickled radicchio</dish> and a circle of liver sauce on which he’d laid a slice of the bird’s heart.
Having casually slouched into its role as a restaurant, Achilles Heel won’t be everyone’s idea of a dinner destination. Narrow-minded eaters may have a hard time with the limited, highly changeable menu. As the night goes on, the music becomes enveloping and the room fills with people who don’t have food in their thoughts. If they start to crowd you out, finish your smoked ice cream with grapefruit sections and make your way out as you ask, where has the time gone?
For those of us who had greedily dismantled Koren Grieveson’s robust, emphatic cooking at Avec in Chicago, her move to New York a couple of years ago was promising news. She landed at Claudette, on lower Fifth Avenue, and while some of her Provençal dishes were excellent, she seemed slightly miscast and left after a year.
Last summer, she took over as the chef of a nine-year-old restaurant on East 29th Street called 
. It is nominally Belgian, but its covert theme since its opening in 2007, the year 
 in The Times, has always been the glories of animal flesh and fat. This seems to suit Ms. Grieveson, whose cooking there has some of its old Avec swagger.
Lamb ribs, a Resto fixture since the days of its first chef, Ryan Skeen, were deeply compelling in a dark, intense honey glaze with rosemary; lime juice gave them a lift that was unexpected and just right. A vadouvan aioli brought subtle harmonies to another bar snack, pink and <dish>juicy meatballs</dish> fried in <dish>bread crumbs</dish>.
You don’t often meet up with winter salads as dynamic as the one Ms. Grieveson puts together out of endive and celery root with mint, slivers of dried apricots and long twists of <dish>lamb bacon</dish>; the <dish>orange vinaigrette</dish> tasted like the sun coming out after a blizzard.
Piled on thick rafts of <dish>bread</dish>, brandade turned out the way I always hope it will, often in vain, but not this time: fluffy and dense at once, with very tender and silky chunks of <dish>salt cod</dish>. I was really impressed by the Puy lentils served with crisp-skinned dorade; Ms. Grieveson had wonderfully cooked these earthy legumes with sweet and fruity black garlic.
Other seafood dishes could be underwhelming; there wasn’t much flavor in tiny remoulade-dressed <dish>shrimp</dish> served in a scooped-out November tomato, and hard little nubs of mussels undermined all the effort Ms. Grieveson put into steaming them with harissa, fennel, brussels sprouts and spaghetti squash.
Desserts can seem like an afterthought, and one night I skipped them entirely because the other courses had taken forever to emerge from the kitchen.
Ingredients that once walked on the land were a safer bet. Beautifully roasted duck and grapes were accented with gin underscored by juniper berries. Beef tongue braised in beer had a satisfying sear on the edges and a little extra crunch from flakes of sesame brittle. Nearly everything, whether cooked in beer or not, gets along nicely with it; the wonderful, often obscure bottles and drafts are Resto’s strongest link with Belgium.
