Plein Sud



ANY lingering doubts about whether television is affecting New York City restaurants are erased by a
visit to Plein Sud, an awkward little bistro that opened recently off the lobby of the Smyth Hotel,
on Chambers Street and West Broadway. The restaurant’s chef, Ed Cotton, has worked behind Cat Cora
on the “Iron Chef” programs, and is a contestant on the current season of “Top Chef.” His food at
Plein Sud, vaguely Provençal in inspiration, is camera ready, beautifully composed and ready for its
close-up. But in the full experience of real life, over a number of meals, whether at a crowded
dinner or leisurely lunch, the cooking at Plein Sud reveals itself to be lacking in flavor, texture,
temperature or interest: room-service fare that leads to increased loneliness, raiding of the
minibar, sleepless hours staring at the television in blue light, thinking about home. The
nonpleasures begin at the start of each meal, with cold, industrial rolls served with a black-olive
butter that is neither smooth nor studded but simply purple and salty, with pieces of olive flesh
here and there. They continue apace: a slops   of <dish>frisée and lardons</dish>, with a slimy chicken-liver
ragout; dry and featureless flatbreads, neither hot nor cold, including a <dish>pissaladière topped with
limp onions</dish>, a few black olives and only a hint of white anchovy. Some <dish>celery rémoulade</dish> was ordered
to accompany this, off a list of “seasoned” vegetables meant to be eaten with the restaurant’s
selection of acceptable deli meats: saucisson sec, bresaola and the like. There is also a fine pâté
de campagne. Mr. Cotton adds apples to the classic mixture of mayonnaise, lemon juice and Dijon
mustard. The result might be a base for someone else’s transgressive  . This was followed one night
by a mushy skate wing with a brown-butter sauce that ran very close to scorched, defining the taste
of inattention. <dish>Skirt steak</dish> was cooked into chewy submission. <dish>Pasta with fiery merguez</dish>, however, was
perfect and welcome. A lunchtime <dish>burger stuffed with white Cheddar</dish> and slathered in a McSpecial
sauce of black-truffle aioli came aboard a toasted-stale brioche bun with a pink slice of
supermarket tomato. Five Guys does better. <dish>Shaved roast leg of lamb</dish> came riding something on the
order of dry Texas toast, over an herbed goat cheese reminiscent of Boursin. Consuming it took much
water. In all, this is grim stuff, even if served by cheerful service-industry newcomers for whom
every phrase is exclamatory: “Awesome choice!” (They’re as French as the sisters of Delta Nu.) The
seats are comfortable enough, and the L-shaped room — designed by AvroKo to resemble some
combination of a barn in Avignon and a chic grandmother’s Paris apartment — is not unpleasant. Plein
Sud draws a handsome crowd, seemingly made up of equal parts hotel guests (“I used to stay at 60
Thompson”), television fans (“Psst, look, I think that’s Kenny from ‘Top Chef’!’ ”) and
gastro-tourists photographing their mussels in coconut milk (not bad, as it happens). It is not the
snack room at Motel 6. But it is by no means a good restaurant. Wall & Water, a sprawl of a room
that opened in the spring above the lobby of the Andaz Hotel, at Wall and Water Streets, suffers
from a different problem. The food is mostly first rate. But the room, handsomely designed by the
Rockwell Group, is at the top of a staircase that may require of some diners the use of crampons and
ropes to ascend. It is hidden from the street. There are no passers-by within it, and as yet no
people hoping for a glance at the chef, Máximo López May, who was the chef at the Park Hyatt in
Buenos Aires. Before him are tableaus of men and women poring over the drafts of PowerPoint
presentations while stabbing at vegetables, terribly alone, or families in repose, children whining
over milk, parents staring wordless and exhausted at the ceiling. Groups of business associates dine
together at large tables at each end of the place. The rhythm of the open kitchen is stilted by the
ebb and flow of big parties in an otherwise uncrowded room — the service runs hot and cold as a
result. But Mr. López May’s food, which looks to the Hudson Valley for ingredients and to both South
America and New England for preparation, can soar. His cooks  grill baby zucchini and serve them
still crunchy with slices of orange and red onion, with chervil and plenty of salty, slick
anchovies: each taste distinctive and full, combining into loveliness. They slow-roast red peppers,
then chop them into a kind of cocktail sauce to mix with tender steamed shrimp for a rustic,
full-flavored take on shrimp cocktail. There is a vibrant <dish>cucumber salad</dish>, with caper berries,
olives, parsley, mint, basil, a hint of chili fire and a cool dressing of sherry vinegar, with bits
of crouton for texture. It is hardly in season, but the cooks sear asparagus in a small cast-iron
skillet, then serve it beneath a dressing of sharp Cheddar, red wine sauce and a farm egg — one time
duck, fat and yellow; another time pheasant, wee and rich. A <dish>salt-cod casserole</dish> might follow, like
something out of 1870 Beacon Hill, with peas and potatoes and cream; or <dish>pork-belly confit</dish> out of the
modern age, with sautéed collards and rosemary-scented apples, with a fat-cutting horseradish sauce.
Only a tiny so-called New York steak disappointed: flavorless, very expensive and leatherlike beside
crushed new potatoes and a spicy roast-tomato sauce. (Dull some of the pain with a build-your-own
sundae dessert.) Wall & Water is a simple restaurant, with a modest menu, the sort that, were it
served on a West Village side street, might develop a neighborhood following. In the financial
district, on the third floor of a hotel owned by the Hyatt chain, it is a delightful surprise, a
case of pleasure arising out of diminished expectations. And we may yet hear more about Mr. López
May, who is from Argentina. Before coming to America, he was the host of a number of cooking shows
on El Gourmet, the Latin cooking channel. Perhaps he could be the next Food Network star. 85 West
Broadway (Chambers Street), TriBeCa; (212) 204-5555, . Lobby chic.  Conversational, though over a
soundtrack of classic rock.  Pasta with merguez.  Franco-American.  Dinner appetizers, $8 to $21;
entrees, $16 to $32. Daily, 7 to 11: a.m.; Sunday through Wednesday, 11:30 a.m. to 11 p.m.;
Thursday, Friday and Saturday until midnight. Recommended.  All major cards.  The restaurant is at
street level with accessible restrooms.   ★ 75 Wall Street (entrance on Water Street), financial
district; (212) 590-1234. Charge it to the room, please.  Quiet.  <dish>Grilled vegetables</dish>, <dish>shrimp
cocktail</dish>, salt cod, sundaes.  Not much below $50, but some nice big American reds.  Appetizers, $3
to $15; entrees, $17 to $46. Daily, 6:30 to 10:30 a.m.; 11:30 a.m. to 2:30 p.m.; 5:30 to 11 p.m.
Recommended. All major cards.  Dining room is accessible by elevator. Restrooms are large.  
Ratings range from zero to four stars and reflect the reviewer’s reaction to food, ambience and
service, with price taken into consideration. Menu listings and prices are subject to change.
