Cafe China
Chinese
13 East 37th Street,
212-213-2810
FOR a certain kind of food enthusiast, there is a deeply felt but little examined belief that
immigrant-run restaurants, like presidential candidates, should not pay too much attention to their
appearance. Just as a $400 haircut can spell days of bad press for a politician, a dining room
outfitted with anything that might be termed design can raise suspicions of misplaced priorities.
Some Sichuan-food fanatics I know, for instance, would roll their eyes at  . It looks far too pretty
for a place serving a cuisine renowned for its chile-powered ability to make eaters teary-eyed and
sweaty. Out front is the potted bamboo whose fronds sway in whatever breezes find their way to East
37th Street in Midtown. A vintage bird cage sways from the ceiling by the front door. Soft light is
thrown by candles and chandeliers of hobnail milk glass, and the robin’s-egg-blue walls are hung
with images of Shanghai starlets from the 1930s. A bartender pours cocktails into etched-glass
coupes, and portable typewriters are here and there. (Customers use one as a guest book, tapping out
compliments.) The skeptics would look at you with outright disbelief if you told them that this
quaint, demure restaurant serves uncompromising Sichuan food that can stand with Manhattan’s best.
But a cold appetizer of spicy diced rabbit will silence the doubters. It silences everybody, even
the ones who aren’t totally sure they want to eat small cubes of bone-in rabbit with scallions and
peanuts. The bones turn out to be essential to the overall experience, though. You need a minute to
separate them from the meat, and during that minute some very intense things begin to happen to your
tongue and lips. The sauce on that rabbit blends Sichuan peppercorns with scoops of small, fiery
dried chiles. Sichuan cooks call the heat of chile peppers la. Ma is the word for the mouth-numbing
zing of their region’s prized peppercorns. Stir them together and you have ma la. The chile heat and
the Sichuan pepper tingle intensify each other until your mouth vibrates the way Wile E. Coyote does
when he is hit on the head by an iron beam. You get the ma la buzz from the ma po  , too. In this
hot entree, the nearly flavorless pockets of soft, delicate tofu offer safe harbor from the ma la
assault (momentarily, at least). Then you take another forkful and it begins again. You have about
four seconds to appreciate how exquisitely balanced the ma and la are before you reach for a drink,
or cold cucumbers or bitter melon. The force of its ma la kick is certainly one test of a good
Sichuan restaurant, but not the only one. As Fuchsia Dunlop noted in her cookbook “Land of Plenty,”
ma la is one of 23 distinct flavor combinations in Sichuan cooking. One of the best reasons to go to
Café China is that the chef, Lu Ziqiang, shows great control of flavors beyond the head-spinning
realm of ma la. Even his spiciest recipes hold back from obliterating your palate, so you can taste
the other dishes. As a chile-seeking friend put it, “Nothing is disgustingly hot.” That was a
compliment. Pickle and fish stew has a burn that stops short of eye-watering, with round slices of
preserved red chile bobbing in the broth like life preservers around a shipwreck. But it also has a
sharp tang of pickled mustard greens that changes the formula to something new. Cumin leads the
charge in other dishes, not just the well-known cumin lamb, which is superb and velvety here, but
also in a dish called baby black lamb, which gains depth from fermented tofu and sweetness from red
bell peppers. Cumin seeds and chiles strafe a whole tilapia that is steamed inside a tent of foil.
Any objections I might have had to seeing fish given this rough, almost brutal treatment were
forgotten the minute I started to eat. A far more gentle fate was dealt to the tea-smoked duck, with
its whisper of smoke, its crisp handsomely rendered skin and its dipping sauce of sweet miso. Mr.
Lu, a native of Chengdu, Sichuan’s capital, excels at foods that are marinated or cured, like the
duck or the great cold appetizer of sliced beef with five-spice flavor, or the pork belly inside
what the menu calls, confusingly, shredded pork sandwiches. (The pork is in fact sliced, and the
sandwiches are the kind of steamed buns familiar to Momofuku followers.) Café China was opened in
August by Xian Zhang and his wife, Yiming Wang. The two are Chinese-born bankers who make up for
their lack of restaurant experience with the strength of their convictions. They insisted on a
focused menu of about 75 items, with no egg rolls for the takeout crowd. They argued with Mr. Lu
about monosodium glutamate, and won their case by force, charging into the kitchen to throw the MSG
away. Without it, the smoked tofu with Chinese celery shoots doesn’t deliver the same kick in the
head you’d get at Sichuanese competitors a few blocks away, but it does have a clean celery flavor.
Even under a blizzard of spices, the main ingredients at Café China taste like themselves. Ms. Wang
was in charge of the décor, meant to evoke Shanghai before  . Sometimes she seems to picture herself
as a design element, gliding across the dining room in tight vintage dresses and bobbed hair. The
restaurant works at a languorous, almost tropical tempo. This sometimes manifests itself in hazy
service and puzzling waits for cold appetizers, but mostly it is a refreshing change from the usual
staccato rhythms of Midtown Sichuan operations. For ma la maniacs, these are glorious days. Once you
leave Chinatown, good Sichuan food may be easier to find in Manhattan than good Cantonese food. In
Chelsea is the amazing  ; Land of Plenty opened near Bloomingdale’s; there are Grand Szechuans all
over. The 30s alone have  ,  , Mapo Tofu and Café China. With so many expert chile-wrangling chefs,
surely there’s space for a restaurant where a casually cool retro interior can be home to Sichuan’s
enveloping heat.
