Joy Luck Palace
Chinese, Dim Sum
98 Mott Street,
212-219-2828
Everyone wants the little piggies, plump white buns with black sesame-seed eyes, orange snouts and
slashes of ears that look more like worried brows. At Joy Luck Palace in Manhattan’s Chinatown, they
come three to a steamer basket and harbor gooey souls of custard. Every day hundreds of them are
wheeled around a dining room that would dwarf some nations’ airports. It’s a wonder that any make
it, unsnatched, to the far side, but somehow the dim-sum cart ladies manage it, like Jesus
multiplying the loaves and fishes. The piggies are cute, but a diversion. The truly great custard
buns are neither ornamented nor anthropomorphized, but simply pale as ghosts, giving no hint of the
lushness within: custard dark gold and voluptuous with salted duck yolk. It’s salty and sweet in the
eternal battle that may as well be love. Some call them lava buns — justifiably, as a diner
discovered when the molten filling shot all over her dress. A waitress clucked. “This one doesn’t
know how to eat,” she said in Cantonese. Joy Luck Palace opened in January in a space that has seen
multiple dim sum iterations. (In the early 1990s, one, Harmony Palace, was reportedly run by the
head of  .) Now the chandeliers and brocade curtains are gone, replaced by bare walls and squiggly
ceiling cutouts contoured in colored lights. Diners pass through a lobby flanked by lethargic crabs
in watery cubicles and glass cases stocked with long-lobed Buddha figurines. Up the steps, the
besieged host shouts numbers into a microphone. There are enough tables to seat 500, and from
morning to early afternoon, every one of them is full. The chef, Hui Qiang Liu, from Guangzhou in
southern China, has a steady hand with classics: translucent har gow with tidy pleats and
open-mouthed siu mai in ruched collars, dense turnip cakes and slippery cheong fun, char siu bao
with cracked smiles and baked pork buns as shiny as brioche. You grab what you can: rugged fish
balls, bony nubs of spare ribs, ribbons of tripe and chicken feet yielding their cartilage. At
times, this can feel like a scavenger hunt. Here: bamboo shoots bundled in sagging folds of
bean-curd skin. There: lotus leaves that unfold to reveal sticky rice and the steamy scent of earth
after rain. The little piggies are a nod to a Hong Kong fad. But older dishes are honored, too, like
cups of bitter melon stuffed with pork, dried shrimp and dried scallop, the first bite
unconscionably bitter, the second almost sweet. I have yet to meet a person of Chinese descent who
wholly approves of the state of dim sum in New York City. Much of what you get at Joy Luck Palace is
good, if not transcendent, and some of it, by the time it reaches your table, may have gone cold or
stale. But the range is thrilling: whole shrimp robed in sticky rice, as if beaded in pearls; tight
sacs of curried squid; chewy disks of glutinous rice flour with pork sealed inside. Then comes cart
after cart of rich golden cake with tiny sinkholes, leaf-shaped buns hiding daubs of purple taro,
pale green puffs wafting the telltale scent of durian and more desserts than I could ever try.
Johnny Yee, who owns the restaurant with Yong Jin Chan, also oversees Kam Hing Coffee Shop, whose
memorable spongecakes taste of little but eggs and the tears of angels. Every morning they are
brought fresh to Joy Luck Palace, but are available for takeout only. Expect disorder. I spent one
meal chasing dim-sum carts when none could get through the close-set tables surrounding mine. Small
parties share tables with strangers, and a dirty tablecloth may be half rolled up and a clean one
half rolled out — yin and yang — to accommodate lingerers and new arrivals. Still, in the end,
everyone is taken care of. Once, when I asked for soy sauce, a waitress looked suspiciously at our
table and pointed to a helping of cheong fun swamped with soy. “You already have,” she said in
Cantonese. We thought we would never see her again, but a moment later she returned, carrying two
little dishes of soy sauce. She didn’t smile, but it felt like grace.
