Saraghina
Italian, Pizza
435 Halsey Street,
718-574-0010
DON’T be fooled: Saraghina is a restaurant in pizzeria’s clothing. Yes, the front dining room is
dominated by a wood-burning oven; the pizzaiolo learned his craft from Michele Iuliano of Luzzo’s;
and the menu, a single sheet of paper, lists little more than six Naples-style pizzas ($10 to $15).
But really, Saraghina is a trattoria — you just need to seek out the specials, an appealing
selection of salads, antipasti, pastas and seafood dishes that change daily. It’s home cooking, or
at least the kind of uncomplicated food some stylish Italians might throw together at their weekend
house. Not that there’s anything clumsy about a dish like the swordfish carpaccio ($13). Thin
medallions of local swordfish are drizzled with olive oil and sprinkled with sea salt, thyme and
pink peppercorns. It’s an elegant start to a meal. That is, if it’s available. The specials change
so often it would take dozens of visits to gauge the kitchen’s repertory. Outside of the pizzas, you
don’t go back to Saraghina for your favorites. You go back to try something new. Which might be
grilled octopus salad ($13); or mussels steamed with garlic and crushed pepper ($11); or burratina
($11), a thick slice of burrata drizzled with olive oil and served with a pile of grape  . It tasted
like summer. Or baby artichokes ($10), which were sautéed in white wine and olive oil and served
with a leafy pile of shaved fennel. On one visit prosciutto and melon ($11), that antipasto
warhorse, was a dazzling display of exquisite ingredients, the sweet and salty flavors brightened by
sprigs of mint. (Most of the produce is from Greenmarket vendors, but the herbs are even more local:
they’re from the Bed-Stuy Farm, a part of the Brooklyn Rescue Mission.) You also go back to linger
in the dining rooms, which are unexpectedly pretty. The restaurant is in a part of
Bedford-Stuyvesant where the side streets are lined with row houses as stately as any anywhere else
in Brooklyn. But Saraghina has the casual elegance of a beach rental on the North Fork, all
whitewashed walls and battered furniture. It was cobbled together from a storefront, a garage and a
neighboring garden. To get from one dining room to the other you twist your way through the pantry,
a narrow hallway lined with dinner plates and the juice glasses the restaurant uses for wine. The
design is the handiwork of Massimiliano Nanni and his wife, Paola Citterio. Mr. Nanni also owns
Piadina, in the West Village. The couple live a few doors away and say Saraghina is the neighborhood
restaurant they always wanted to open. Edoardo Mantelli, the restaurant’s other owner, is the chef.
Until this spring Mr. Mantelli was the creative director of the fashion line Tocca, where he’s still
a partner. Since he was a boy in Milan his fantasy was to run a restaurant, and his enthusiasm
shows. But the dishes don’t always measure up. One night the spaghetti with ragù di pesce ($14) — a
rich sauce of simmered bluefish and fresh tomatoes — tasted intensely of the ocean. But the
spaghetti with bacon and tomatoes ($14) was disappointingly bland. And I would skip the mushy
panzanella ($8). A dinner at Saraghina is so enjoyable it’s easy to forgive the occasional
inconsistency. Which is why the neighborhood has taken to it so strongly. Saraghina has been busy
since it opened in June, even though it hasn’t been easy for those who don’t live in
Bedford-Stuyvesant to stop by: the restaurant has no phone and it does not  take reservations. The
best thing to do is just go. 435 Halsey Street (Lewis Avenue), Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn. No
phone.  Capocollo pizza; burratina; sautéed artichokes; swordfish carpaccio; spaghetti with ragù di
pesce. Beer and wine will be served starting Aug. 15.  Cash only.  No.  No.  Open for dinner 6 to 11
p.m. daily and brunch, noon to 4 p.m. Saturday and Sunday.
