The National Bar and Dining Rooms
American
557 Lexington Avenue,
212-715-2400
FIFTIETH Street and Lexington Avenue is the pulsing heart of no particular neighborhood, a lively
intersection near the back door to the Waldorf-Astoria, just south of a DoubleTree. Office workers
stream through on the way to the subway stop at the corner. Hotel guests pilot wheelie bags deep
into yellow-cab traffic, and bark at one another in French. If you were looking for a neighborhood
bistro of the sort where you might linger over dinner for a while, happily talking with friends
while picking at fries and finishing a bottle of wine, the corner would rank low on a list of
possible locations. Here, though, is the National Bar and Dining Rooms, a relatively new
neighborhood bistro of just that description. With a smart, accessible and not terribly expensive
menu written by the silver-haired celebrity chef Geoffrey Zakarian and executed by Paul Corsentino,
his chef de cuisine, the National delivers more than its location would promise, and handsomely. Its
wide leather booth seats and a beautiful tiled floor, designed along with the rest of the restaurant
by David Rockwell, manage to evoke grand European cafes. But the grand circular stairwell near the
entrance, rising above and around a pristine and artfully parked delivery bicycle, speaks
impressively in a more familiar accent. Only in New York would someone place a bicycle near the
swooping circular staircase built in the middle of a restaurant as a kind of eye magnet. The
peculiar intersection of art and design, space and lack of it, makes the space interesting, makes it
hum. (Bicycling about architecture. Where is George Plimpton when you need him?) The National is on
the ground floor of the Benjamin Hotel, which limber-necked art history students may look up to
recognize as the subject of a painting Georgia O’Keeffe made in the mid-1920s, when she was living a
block south, in the Shelton, with her new husband, Alfred Stieglitz. the painting is called “New
York — Night.” It depicts a dark, forbidding city of skyscrapers, the Benjamin at the center, dotted
with warm yellow light of office desk lamps twinkling 30 stories up, and glowing at its bottom with
a hearthlike orange that promises warmth and fellowship, and the city at its loveliest. Mr. Rockwell
captures the quality of this light and uses it to animate the warm colors of the restaurant’s floor
and burnished treads on his beautiful stairs, and to soften what might otherwise be a transitory,
hotel-lobby feel. Customers spin into the very middle of the restaurant through a revolving door and
are quite literally surprised by what happens: What could so easily be a soulless Midtown hotel
dining hall presents as a sincere and bustling restaurant. This is appetizing, as it happens: it is
the sort of restaurant where it is nice to be. And the food, which hews close to Mr. Zakarian’s
new-American aesthetic, is to match. It is simple but not really, a menu of standards put through
the reinvention machine, followed by wise and often wonderful desserts from Marisa Croce, the
restaurant’s pastry chef. (Best bets on that front: malt gelato with devil’s food cake; spiced
parsnip cake; a sundae with terrific hazelnut brittle — all good. Avoid the fruit plate, which is
seasonal only in the sense that you can always get berries from somewhere.) Mr. Corsentino’s
appetizers are strong: crisp pork nuggets with a soft onion soubise and pickled jalapeños, apples
and grapes, for instance; as well as a nice grilled octopus with chorizo and cannellini beans; and
beef tongue with bone marrow, pickled turnips and a brussels sprouts slaw (say that three times
fast). Diners share the delicate fried arancini or the light roasted meatballs, served with peppers.
They slurp at oysters that come with an excellent cocktail sauce and an apple-ginger mignonette, or
sip sweet pea soup with lemon cream, an English daydream in an American’s head. A gummy dish of
ricotta gnudi with mushrooms, Parmesan and watercress that seemed imported from an episode of
“Chopped,” the television cooking competition for which Mr. Zakarian has served as a judge, was a
disappointment. So, too, a Caesar   that lacked both zing and zang. But beet salad with thick,
strained brown-butter yogurt, pears and hazelnuts can save a table’s mood and did, an almost
sweet-and-sour riff on a dish that usually hits only sweet notes. Main courses mostly kept up the
parade, save in the instance of a muddy entree of roasted pork tossed with fettuccine, with ramps
and snap peas. A fine dish of roast chicken with   and spring garlic would be a nice thing to eat on
your first night in New York after a hellish flight from Los Angeles or London, though; and a
perfectly cooked fist of Atlantic cod with polenta, leeks and a funky little sauce of orange and
olives could greet you, as well. A dice roll on the pork chop with cheese grits and candied garlic
came up craps on one occasion, but was juicy and flavorful on another, with real lusciousness below
the meat. Steak frites with mizuna and a red-wine sauce seemed to gild the lily with fingerpaint
instead of gold — mizuna lacks the heft and punch of either watercress or arugula, and cannot match
the beefy flavor of steak. Meat eaters would more wisely turn in the direction of Mr. Corsentino’s
burger, which is an ugly-looking affair below its pickled onions and jalapeños, but has flavor to
spare. He has someone with a good hand on the deep-fryer, as well: the fries that should accompany
both dishes have massive crunch and good potato flavor below their dustings of smoky paprika. You
might order extra, and a second bottle of Au Bon Climat to dance you through to dessert. In a city
run through with restaurants set in hotels, serving food appropriate to hotels, for people who stay
in hotels, in neighborhoods growing crowded with hotels, the prospect of yet another hotel
restaurant to visit or avoid may fill some of us with the weary sense that we are in the midst of a
historical moment that is deeply uninteresting. (How much more exciting it would have been to be
here when O’Keeffe and Stieglitz were padding around the Shelton). But the National makes a case
that it is different, decent and worth it, and thanks to Mr. Rockwell’s design and Mr. Corsentino’s
attentions, it generally succeeds in the argument. Fiftieth and Lexington. Who knew?   ★ Benjamin
Hotel, 557 Lexington Avenue (50th Street), Midtown; (212) 715-2400;  . An elegant neighborhood
bistro somehow situated in a Midtown hotel lobby.  Moderate.  Oysters, arancini, crispy pork, beef
tongue, pea soup, beet  , roast chicken, cod, hamburger, malt gelato with devil’s food cake, spiced
parsnip cake, ice-cream sundae.  Serviceable and inoffensive.  Appetizers, $7 to $16; entrees, $15
to $32. Daily, 7 a.m. to 1 a.m. Recommended a few days in advance.  All major cards.  Access to the
dining room is through a side door or the hotel lobby. There is a large restroom on another floor,
accessible by elevator from the lobby.  Ratings range from zero to four stars and reflect the
reviewer’s reaction to food, ambience and service, with price taken into consideration. Menu
listings and prices are subject to change.
