Anella
Italian, New American
222 Franklin Street,
718-389-8100
ANELLA is an intimate little art house of a restaurant on a block in Greenpoint, Brooklyn, that
might be a rough part of Paris or an old part of Boston, some forgotten corner of a city that can
reach back into the 19th century for building stock and scale. The wind whips in off the East River
there sharp as razors, and old women squabble in Polish on the street. You will need your adventure
boots to get there, perhaps. But the narrow bar and dining room are warm as candlelight, decorated
in that nice urban variation on farmhouse chic that is common to restaurants in north Brooklyn, all
brick and reclaimed hardwood, with Edison bulbs hanging from the tin ceiling that cast shadows over
pockmarked plaster and ancient paint. (Beards and cardigans abound at the tables, as well as vintage
dresses, heavy clogs.) Service is easygoing, nice. And the food is a wonder: a tight and focused
menu of simple, seasonally appropriate food from Joseph Ogrodnek, a talented chef who has been in
the kitchen for almost a year. It is by no means a formal restaurant. There is a worn A.T.M. in the
back. Drafts circulate in the winter’s chill, and the U-shape of the bar and dining room can lead to
what traffic engineers call flow issues. Those Edison lights are so dim, it can be hard to read the
brief menu. Still, for those amenable to a New Year’s resolution to travel the city more, to move
beyond old familiar haunts to taste the new and delicious, Anella is a decent place to discover the
nexus of geography and emotion. We are all in this maze together. Parts of it have really good
restaurants. A flowerpot of bread will start your meal, the loaf served vertically within it in the
manner of a cartoon mushroom, warm and cut into four wedges, with soft salted butter. It tastes of
care and eccentricity combined, the work of a hippie mom in advance of a performance of madrigals:
rich and white and plump. It calls for mulled wine; a wicked Manhattan does the trick as well,
poured over plump little cherries steeped in brandy. (Wine can follow, off a reasonable list that
runs at the Old World more than the New.) Mr. Ogrodnek is a skilled practitioner of the vegetable
arts. Like Midas, who turned everything he touched into gold (and like Dave Pasternack at Esca in
Midtown, who achieves similar results with fish), he elevates the simplest greens and tubers into
realms more celestial than those we are generally used to in wintertime in New York City. “Roasted
broccoli,” reads his menu. “Watercress, parmesan, lemon.” Well, yes. It has the flavor of everything
good that can happen on a farm, with a pure vegetal sweetness enhanced in great measure by the
peppery cress, the salty  , the acidic zing of citrus. A roasted beet   achieves similar heights,
with walnuts and baby greens, and little dabs of the mild, almost sweet blue cheese called
gorgonzola dolce. So does a peppery green salad with apples, pecans and bits of sharp, nutty,
English-style Cabot Cheddar, and another of sunchokes shaved thin, then served with orange segments,
pebbles of pistachio and a few sheets of pecorino. This is dirt wizard food of high caliber, cooking
that leads people to join community-supported agriculture programs and fill their homes with
parsnips and kale. But Mr. Ogrodnek does not ignore the pleasures of the flesh. He put in time with
Alain Ducasse at the Essex House,  then at Gramercy Tavern, followed by a turn with Jean-Georges
Vongerichten at the Mark. He can cook with the confident sneer of a Frenchman. His steak tartare is
a robust and flavorful thing, served beside crisp-cooked artichokes and a soft mound of oil-slicked
herbs. His golden leg of duck confit with a pool of smoky, bacon-studded lentils happily straddles
the crisp-soft divide. He takes sweet Chatham cod and pairs it with zucchini, broccoli, basil and a
hint of chili fire, cooking the fish to beautiful flakiness, so that it slides apart under the least
pressure from a fork. A fat pork chop, teamed with yams, maple syrup and pecans, nods to an America
we all wish we lived in, where the pigs are fat and healthy instead of lean and terrifying, and yams
taste of the earth and the sky, not marshmallows and despair. It may profile on the menu as too
sweet because of the vegetable and the syrup. But there is harmony among  all flavors, and it makes
a marvelous dish. There are pastas as well: a short rigatoni with pancetta, brussels sprouts and
parmesan, the dish lightened with lemon juice; and a straightforward puttanesca that is a
neighborhood favorite, a regular’s dish, suitable for weekly dinner at the bar, which was assembled
from salvaged worktables from the Steinway piano factory in Astoria, Queens. (The regulars return in
droves for Sunday brunch, which offers eggs and granola, crisp French toast and a hamburger that
would do good service on the regular dinner menu, at least as an occasional special.) And do you
remember when there was fried calamari on every third menu in New York, when those greasy rings were
the sliders of their day? At Anella, the dish makes a return alongside silky anchovy mayonnaise as
if to remind us why we once loved it. Steamed mussels come in a broth made fiery with soppressata
and red onions, with delicate, earthy potato fries on the side. They are, likewise, a familiar dish
made fresh in the execution. It is only in sweets that Mr. Ogrodnek stumbles, and then only in
comparison to his work on the savory side. He makes a fine olive-oil cake, though, one worth
ordering particularly after a dinner of roast chicken with crisp little fingerlings, creamy feta and
a heap of salty, peppery wild arugula. The combination is bliss. “Sir, respect your dinner,” wrote
Thackeray, thundering. “Idolize it, enjoy it properly. You will be by many hours in the week, many
weeks in the year, and many years in your life the happier if you do.” Anella has no apparent
ambitions beyond making this possible. Annoyingly, it takes no credit cards.. But Mr. Ogrodnek does
his level best to make your trip worthwhile. Taxi!   ★ 222 Franklin Street (Green Street),
Greenpoint, Brooklyn; (718) 389-8100;  . Pleasantly hipsterish: The raggedy bar belies both the care
with which it was put together and the quality of the kitchen in back.  Moderate.  Roasted broccoli,
sunchoke  , roasted beets, steak tartare, pastas, fried calamari, Chatham cod, roasted chicken, duck
confit, pork chop, olive oil cake.  Modest and well suited to the menu.  Dinner appetizers, $9 to
$14; pastas, $15 to $16; main courses, $13 to $25. Tuesday to Thursday, 5:30 to 10 p.m.; Friday and
Saturday, 5:30 to 11 p.m.; Sunday, 5:30 to 10 p.m.; Saturday and Sunday, 11 a.m. to 3 p.m.
Recommended at least a few days in advance.  Cash only.  Restaurant is all on one level, but
entrance is up a step and the passage from there to the dining room is exceedingly narrow.  Ratings
range from zero to four stars and reflect the reviewer’s reaction to food, ambience and service,
with price taken into consideration. Menu listings and prices are subject to change.
