Amaranto
Mexican
887 Hart Street,
718-576-6001
At   in Bushwick, Brooklyn, the tamale arrives bare, shorn of its corn-husk wrap and half-submerged
in chilpachole, a reddish-gold crab broth tasting of sea floor and muddy burrows, as if siphoned
from the Gulf of Mexico. Mussels gawk from the bowl, mouths full of chorizo, cut in hunks like
lardons. The hulking tamale, a swaddle of masa (corn dough) laced with epazote, is a winking
reference to the pebble-size masa dumplings that often come with a more traditional chilpachole.
Here the masa has been suffused with huitlacoche, a fungus that blooms bluish-gray, like bruises,
out of ears of corn, making the kernels swell and blister. It’s a killer, and the Mexican equivalent
of black truffles, lending a meaty, mushroomy counterpoint to the sweetness of the corn. This is
what surf and turf should be: earthy and briny at once, a meeting point where land shades into sea.
Amaranto’s tamale is a thrilling and ambitious dish, slightly unexpected at this outwardly placid,
modest family-run restaurant that opened in February in a former corner bodega. The chef, Fermin
Teco, grew up in Puebla, Mexico, and came to New York in 2000 at age 20. He learned to cook from his
mother and then on the job, starting off at   and eventually finding a mentor in Máximo Tejada at
the experimental (and now closed) pan-Latin restaurant  . Nothing else on the menu quite rises to
the level of the tamale, but Mr. Teco has a gentle way with ingredients that allows flavors to
emerge decorously rather than shove themselves forward. A simple crab tostada, radiant with lime, is
stealthily dusted with fennel salt, introducing a distant whiff of candy, and dehydrated olives,
whose intensity approaches aged cheese. Huitlacoche lurks in a “corn field soup” of lemongrass and
herb stock, dense with roasted corn, carrots, leeks and green beans, all underwritten by grassy
epazote. Amaranto is Spanish for amaranth, an ingredient that Mr. Teco remembers fondly from Mexico,
where for centuries the seeds have been popped and welded with honey into crunchy cakes, a
proto-Rice Krispies Treat. Here the seeds are strewn over a floral arrangement of Boston lettuce,
beets, corn and strands of jicama, with splashes of scarlet dressing, faintly woodsy from
lemongrass, ending in a high note of hibiscus. Mr. Teco’s mother, Paulina Luna, contributes a
beautiful mole poblano, velvety with almonds and cacao and flecked with sesame seeds, a dark
enveloping blanket over roasted chicken enchiladas. Short ribs that are mellow from hours of
braising with cinnamon and an entourage of chiles easily unstitch themselves in a bracing mole verde
of pepitas, tomatillos, epazote and hoja santa, a Mesoamerican herb that feints at licorice. On
recent visits, a few dishes were muddled, like a too-firm pork chop beside a confused heap of dry
rice, olives and yellow squash, distracting from an otherwise intriguingly near-bitter mole de
Querétaro rich with cacao, almonds and pecans. Rice verging on risotto, creamy with fish stock,
queso fresco and Monterey Jack cheese, was oddly staid, despite hosting a crowd of mussels and
shrimp. Tacos are generous, but oversauced and less precise in their details than Mr. Teco’s other
dishes. Perhaps they are on the menu only because they have to be. (Bushwick is home to a large
Mexican population; in some stretches of the neighborhood, taquerias punctuate every block.) But
another standby, guacamole, is lush and vivid, both in its classic form and, even better, enflamed
with manzano chiles. The dining room is plain and clean, unremarkable save for the plumed serpent
Quetzalcoatl, slinking across two walls and hissing smoke, with a rainbow of feathers shooting
upward in the style of Diego Rivera. (The mural is by  , a graffiti artist of Mexican descent, who
also painted the restaurant’s facade with the Aztec goddess Coatlicue, wearing a necklace of skulls
and anatomically rendered hearts.) At the bar, Mr. Teco’s father, Fermin Teco Sr., who has a
restaurant résumé 35 years long, mixes cocktails with the likes of cacao liqueur or Xtabentún, an
elixir from Yucatán made of anise, fermented honey and rum. He doubles as host and waiter, surveying
the floor with debonair deadpan. “I like your order,” he said approvingly one evening. When asked if
he was an owner of the restaurant, he demurred. “I own a little part,” he said. “I own the door.”
