ABC Kitchen
New American
35 East 18th Street,
212-475-5829
ANOTHER day, another restaurant from  . The latest is ABC Kitchen, a winsome sprawl on the ground
floor of ABC Carpet & Home, luxe Manhattan’s best source for Ganesh statues and pillows marked with
nautical signal flags. As has become custom for Mr. Vongerichten of late, it is very good. The
notion of the place is haute organic and Hamptons sustainable. The restaurant is airy and open and
relaxed the way the second homes of the wealthy often are, with LED-style lighting over warm floors.
Ingredients for the cooking, as a position paper on the back of the chic cardboard menu declares,
are “consciously sourced.” The breadbaskets were “handcrafted by the indigenous Mapuche people of
Patagonia.” The words tumble out like refrigerator magnets onto the table. Everything here is: Fair
trade! Globally artistic! Reclaimed and recycled! Soy-based! Post-consumer fiber! You meet people
like this. Only when they are spectacularly good-looking and appear to be attracted to you are they
manageable. ABC Kitchen pulls off the magic trick. The food is great and not terribly expensive. It
is a pretty room. The crowd runs high-wattage with net worth to match. And the servers, who might be
made up of the combined casts of “Glee” and

“Friday Night Lights,”

employ a fast-casual style that is a  variation on the one at Mr. Vongerichten’s Spice Market. The
service at ABC Kitchen resembles nothing so much as what you’d probably get out of the house staff
at a weekend getaway with Barry Diller and Diane von Furstenberg. Shall we eat, darlings? For a
farm-to-table restaurant, ABC Kitchen sure has a long diner-style menu: 46 items, from crudités with
an anchovy dip at its top to baked endive with ham and Gruyère at the bottom. There are delicate
farmers’-garden   along the way, chewy whole-wheat  , college-educated cows and monkish chickens. It
can be difficult to know where to begin. Here’s how: with  fiddlehead ferns roasted in the  wood
oven, as fragrant and earthy as the forest floor, a complete rejoinder to the food world’s
fascination with ramps. Also with a large hunk of toast slathered in rich, creamy chicken-liver
mousse, or sweet, briny peekytoe crab meat. With roasted portobellos scented with celery leaves, one
of the great underappreciated tastes of the refrigerator crisper box. Have these while you’re
considering the rest of the menu, along with a bottle of Rolly Gassmann pinot noir, and life starts
to look pretty good. Might head down to St. Bart’s next month after all. It’s much more pleasant in
the off-season. The appetizers include a terrific plate of shaved fluke with grapefruit and
tarragon, in which the sweetness of the fish melds perfectly with the acidity of the grapefruit,
while the tarragon does a dance around the base. There are also baby leeks vinaigrette, one of those
perfect French dishes Mr. Vongerichten sometimes throws into his menus  to establish a baseline
classical melody off which to riff. Dan Kluger, the restaurant’s executive chef, a veteran of Tom
Colicchio’s kitchens and Danny Meyer’s, cooks it as well as the master, with real finesse.
Oven-roasted asparagus is terrific as well, as is a salad of endive, Treviso radicchio and
sugar-snap peas with tiny herbs and a dressing rich with Parmesan and cut down by Champagne vinegar.
Taste that lime juice? That’s Mr. Vongerichten starting to play. Calamari coated in crushed pretzels
is a failure, sadly, damp beneath its salty coating, with a whipped mustard aioli. But baby greens
with sprouts, in a tangy dressing enlivened by lemon and yogurt, swings back toward success; a sweet
mackerel sashimi fired by ginger and softened by mint pins the needle there. Pastas are only
occasionally exciting, as in the ricotta-rich, black-pepper-showered cavatelli with guanciale,
ramps, fava beans, peas and pecorino. But a few pizzas for your table would not be in error,
starting with the delicious morels with Parmesan, oregano and a soft large-yolked egg. Clams with
mint, parsley and fresh chilies was on one night sublime, about the best bivalve   on the planet:
salty with a ping of fire, incandescent with flavor and texture above its soft, charred whole-wheat
crust. It was overcooked and underseasoned on another evening, more like the third-best personal
pizza available above 14th Street. The best of the entrees include a black sea bass with chilies,
herbs, red bliss potatoes and spinach that can serve as an object lesson in Mr. Vongerichten’s and
Mr. Kluger’s cooking. The fillet is scented with marjoram and mint, basil, dill and jalapeño, then
roasted. The potatoes, meanwhile, cook in water infused with rosemary and tarragon, lemon zest,
ginger. These all come together on the plate, with wilted spinach beneath a drizzle of olive oil and
a bit of sweet lemon confit, with a soft yet crisp, sweet yet fiery precision. But steamed halibut
with shiitakes, avocado and juiced asparagus isn’t chipped beef, not by a long shot. And while the
strip steak is a chew, it still comes with brilliant glazed carrots and oyster mushrooms, worth
ordering on their own. As at the Mark Restaurant by Jean-Georges, a restaurant Mr. Vongerichten
recently opened on the Upper East Side, there is a hamburger on the menu. It is better here than
uptown, with its tangy Akaushi-beef flavor, snappy pickled jalapeños, arugula- and basil-rich
mayonnaise, sharp Cato Corner cheese and soft Eli’s bun. Also as at the Mark, there is a split-open,
oven-roasted  , here seasoned with an almost-spicy vinaigrette that shines with lemon: sustainable
luxury at $35 a throw. Desserts are quite plain at ABC Kitchen, as if  to avoid competing with the
easy luxury of the surroundings and the deceptive simplicity of the entrees: fruit and sorbets;
crumbles and pies. The best is a sundae comprised of salted caramel-peanut   and candied popcorn,
with whipped cream and chocolate sauce. It is the sort of thing you might eat on a Friday night as
the traffic clears out on the L.I.E., before the drive out to Southampton for the weekend. Perhaps
that sounds cynical? It sure wouldn’t if that’s what you were doing after the meal. And that’s the
point of ABC Kitchen entirely: It represents fantasy, wealth without guilt, socially responsible
hedonism. Resistance is futile. Obey. ★★ 35 East 18th Street, ground floor of ABC Carpet & Home,
(212) 475-5829,  . Spiritually materialistic.  High noon of the summer’s best cocktail party.
Chicken liver toast, crab toast, shaved fluke, leeks vinaigrette, sugar-snap pea  , cavatelli,
pizzas, sea bass, halibut, hamburger, sundae.  A bit pricey for the length, but some good values in
the $50 to $60 range.  Appetizers, $7 to $15; pizzas and  , $12 to $16; entrees, $19 to $35. 5:30 to
10:30 p.m. Sunday to Thursday; to 11 p.m. Friday and Saturday. Lunch and brunch start June 5: noon
to 3 p.m. Monday to Friday; 11 a.m. to 4 p.m. Saturday and Sunday. Recommended at least 10 days
ahead.  All major cards.  One level with lots of space and accessible restrooms.  Ratings range from
zero to four stars and reflect the reviewer’s reaction to food, ambience and service, with price
taken into consideration. Menu listings and prices are subject to change.
