Littleneck
Seafood
288 Third Avenue ,
718-522-1921
COULD the clam roll become the new lobster roll? Two new Brooklyn restaurants are betting so. It
would be a return to glory: New York once supplied most of the nation’s hard-shelled clams. Canarsie
Indians thrived on mollusks from the stream that became the Gowanus Canal. Nowadays, the old mill
buildings and warehouses along this industrial waterway hold a salty allure for arty types; the
former wasteland downhill from Park Slope is starting to look like Williamsburg. You can experience
the change at     an urban clam shack a cherrystone’s throw from the canal. It is   with a kitchen
led by the Brooklyn restaurant veteran Alan Harding (Gowanus Yacht Club, Patois). On opening nights
for the neighboring gallery, hipsters wait for seating amid Littleneck’s whitewashed wainscoting and
cute nautical doodads. Andy Curtin, an owner looking more shipmate than band mate in a beard and
woolen cap, swoops about with dishes you’ll be happy to dine on: specials like huge, scrumptious,
head-on shrimp, baked in salt with a touch of tarragon ($12); snappy, fascinating   like pea shoots
with bittersweet popcorn shoots, watermelon radishes and golden beets ($8). Meaty corkscrew whelks
are perfect in drawn garlic butter ($1 each). Urchins are creamy embodiments of sea ($6 each). The
fabulous bicoastal   selection ($2 for East Coast, $3 for West) delivers bracing, diverse pleasures
vividly described by the waitresses — British Columbian Kusshis have a “slight melon flavor,”
Chincoteagues are “kind of lemony.” The oysters are even better than their compadre shellfish. The
eponymous clams on the half shell are tender and mellow ($1.50), but the chowder — white rather than
red at this self-proclaimed New England-style shack — wants for creaminess to balance all the
pepper, and the clams within it are chewy ($7). Half the bowl of big, sweet steamers ($13) might
arrive shut tight, while the other half are so soft, they nearly disintegrate with handling. The
clipper-ship-size clam roll ($16) pretty much redeems the mollusk; fat-bellied fried Ipswiches burst
from their griddled split-top roll. Dressed in spicy tartar sauce, the clams taste swell, though
their batter, sadly, lacks crunch. Still, the clam roll trounces the mayonnaise-drowned lobster roll
($18). Perhaps we are indeed experiencing a changing of the guard. That argument is supported by a
visit to    , a pub named for a fabled 19th-century New York merchantman. Watery touches here
include a phantasmagorical undersea mural and a mesmerizing fish tank. You could sit all evening
sipping craft drafts (grassy Avery Ellie’s brown ale, citrusy Victory pilsner) watching those fish.
But you’ll get hungry at some point. There aren’t much more than hot sandwiches on this menu, but,
boy, are they tasty. Tops is the clam roll, a neat little bun dressed in a caper tartar sauce and
iceberg lettuce, then loaded with just-fried clams ($11). They’re small next to Littleneck’s
monsters, but they’re briny-sweet with just the right balance of creamy clam to crisp crust. The bun
makes it feel like fast food — but fast food of a high order. Just as delicious is the kielbasa
($6), a nod to the neighborhood’s Eastern European remnants. Supremely garlicky and smothered in raw
onions, mustard and sauerkraut, it’s not date food, but who needs companionship with a sandwich this
good? Pork schnitzel ($6.50) is juicy and tender, its richness cut by tangy whole-grain mustard and
pickles. The cheeseburger — a high-fat mix of short rib, brisket and chuck — is thin and satisfying
($5.50). The fries ($3) are hot, freshly cut and well salted. Even the Indian-spiced fried vegetable
cutlets please ($6), with an expertly done coriander chutney. There is no waiter service — cooks
emerge with food straight from the heat. Despite the paper plates and limited menu, what they bring
is such great bar food, you’ll feel like one lucky sailor.
