Moldova
Russian
1827 Coney Island Avenue,
718-998-2827
Branches twine above. Balkan   pulses below. The mural on the back wall is a postcard writ large, of
a cave monastery a millennium old, transplanted from the cliffs along the Dniester River to a
utilitarian strip of Midwood, Brooklyn. The tablecloths are red and the chairs hooded in brocade,
and every table seems to seat at least eight. On my visits to   (New York’s one restaurant devoted
to the cooking of the small former Soviet republic wedged between Romania and Ukraine), I felt as if
I had crashed a wedding and been immediately made welcome. There’s a cheery bravado to the dining
room that comes off as charming rather than theme-parky. The details are genuine: The waitresses’
blouses were hand-embroidered in Moldova; the sashes draped on the walls are worn at Moldovan
nuptials by “sponsors” who promise to guide the newlyweds through married life. Likewise the food,
which includes ciorba, a soup whose primal sourness is achieved via a base of bors acru: fermented
wheat bran, cornmeal and stale black bread, laced with lovage and sour cherry leaves.
Crumpled-looking pork-and-veal meatballs crowd the surface. They are quick stabs of salt. The
restaurant’s owner, Radu Panfil, immigrated from Chisinau, Moldova’s capital, in 2005. For a while,
he worked at Paradise, a Russian hot spot in neighboring Sheepshead Bay. At  , the menu is written
in Russian as well as Moldovan — a language effectively identical to Romanian — which speaks to both
southern Brooklyn’s demographics and the complications of Moldovan history. The name of Ileana
Cosanzeana, a princess from Romanian folklore, is invoked alongside pan-fried pastries stuffed
undaintily with cabbage, potatoes or cheese. The knight Fat-Frumos, who rescues her from a zmeu, a
shapeshifting part-human, part-multi-headed dragon, presides over steamed dumplings with similarly
hearty fillings but delicate skins, crimped like gyoza. Also worthy are the less heroically
designated “lazy” dumplings, akin to Italian malfatti, simple squeezes of cheese, egg and flour,
tossed in a pot. The menu is too much for a party of two. Even four would be overcome. Bring
everyone you can and stack the table with creamy salads of veal tongue or salmon and red caviar;
mititei, sausages attended by mustard, raw onions and pale, vinegary peas; and kashkaval, a gentle
sheep’s milk cheese from Transylvania, served in crunchy deep-fried slabs that look like
Filet-O-Fish. Pierce one, and the cheese within, nearly liquid, swoons on the plate. Entrees are
heavy and generous: a broad plank of beef, forthrightly seasoned; practically an entire rabbit,
nicely tender; breaded and baked fillets of zander, a flaky white freshwater fish that’s a cousin of
walleye. A version of chicken Kiev arrives gilded with a slice of tomato and melted cheese, and
floods the plate with butter and dill when cut. The hardest-working dish is  , a cornmeal porridge
like polenta. (Jonathan Harker eats it for breakfast en route to Castle Dracula in Bram Stoker’s
novel.) It manifests as an appetizer, patted into angel-weight orbs around nubs of pork belly and
fried; as creamy mounds half-buried in feta, a supplement to almost every entree; and as an entree
in itself, with a rubble of pork as a side. On first bite it is mild, but you are meant to mix in
the feta and pour on sour cream, along with a stinging, vinegary garlic sauce that changes
everything. The servers have strong opinions about dessert. Obey and there will be prunes engorged
with walnuts and topped with red grape halves for a bright sting; sour cherries rolled into
cigarillo crepes; fried handfuls of dough sealed with sour cream and grape jam. Beware the baba
neagra, described on the menu as a “chocolate backed pudding.” It turns out that chocolate is
present only as a color; the cake, traditionally made with chisleag, or soured milk, is nearly black
from prolonged baking. It appears as a dark fang, flanked by slashes of sour cherry sauce like a
mauled heart. It is almost sweet.
