Yun Nan Flavour Garden
Chinese
5121 Eighth Avenue ,
718-633-3090
First comes the giant bowl of broth, sallow, glazed with oil and flecked with what looks like soot.
Then the waiter, holding a small saucer in one hand, tips in a raw quail egg. This is followed, in
quick chopstick strokes, by baby-pink strips of raw pork and hunks of raw   with its black, mottled
skin still on; pale patches of tofu skin, bean sprouts and garlic chives; and, finally, rice
noodles, long and thick and dumped into the broth all at once, so the liquid bubbles up almost to
the lip of the bowl. This dish, this pageant, is guoqiao mixian, or crossing-the-bridge noodles, and
Yun Nan Flavour Garden, in Sunset Park, Brooklyn, is one of very few places in New York where you
can find it. (The back story: a hundred or so years ago in Yunnan Province, in southwest China, a
woman had to cross a bridge every day to bring her husband lunch. Inevitably, the soup she prepared
arrived cold — until she figured out that a layer of chicken fat on top would seal in the heat, and
that the broth stayed hotter if the other ingredients were added at the last minute.) Let the soup
sit and seethe for a while. The noodles, made in-house, seem to retain bounce and bite no matter how
long they cook. The soup itself is almost creamy with fat but intentionally subdued in flavor. You
are expected to make your own adjustments: thus the glass jar of chile sauce at every table. Yun Nan
Flavour Garden was formerly  , primarily a takeout shop that opened in 2006 on 49th Street just west
of Eighth Avenue. This is the heart of Brooklyn’s Chinatown, which in population now outstrips
Manhattan’s. There, the gnomic menu did not stray far beyond noodles. Certain items always seemed to
be tantalizingly unavailable. (I still wonder about the noodles with coconut skin.) Last June, the
owner, Side Geng, who came to the United States from Kunming, Yunnan’s capital, moved the operation
a few blocks over to a proper restaurant space. Now there are two chandeliers, large round tables
instead of stools, and a longer menu, whose additions include crossing-the-bridge noodles and a
Garden section of non-noodle dishes. Fortunately, the classics remain: rice noodles in lucid soup,
with thickets of cilantro and your choice of chewy meat stews — the waiters tend to push beef, the
chewiest — or crispy meat sauce; the latter turns out to be tiny nubs of pork cracklings and petals
of pig intestine, whose aggressive funk takes over the bowl. Rice noodles without broth, cold and
hot at once, are soaked through with black vinegar, sugar, soy and chile oil and buried under ground
pork, roasted peanuts and visible and vehement chile pepper. Perfect dumplings with delicate skin
and moist, loosely packed pork interiors crowd the surface of a hot and sour “sauce” whose
consistency and depth qualify it as soup. Wheat-based noodles and flat rice noodles, or “rice
stick,” are also available, but they are not house-made and the waiters discourage ordering them.
Somehow, however, my table was allowed to try Hot & Sour Sweet Potatoes Piece, a dish categorized
under rice noodles but in fact containing skinny, translucent vermicelli made from sweet potato
starch. That faint tinge of sweetness was like a giggle in the middle of the broth’s chile-vinegar
death match. The restaurant has something of a cafeteria feel, with help-yourself tubs of metal
spoons and black chopsticks on the tables, which you are likely to share with (friendly) strangers.
Glasses of water are served hot, as they would be in China in winter. And the menu is still more
snack than garden. Few of the non-noodle dishes were available on my visits other than pickled
cucumber; skinny, jade-green tendrils of seaweed that looked ready to slither off the plate; and lu
mein, a mound of thinly sliced offal, boiled and cured. Asked about item No. 47, the mysteriously
named Triple Red, a waiter replied, “We’ve never had that.” But what was it? “I don’t know.” I still
wonder.
