Cassia
Asian, Vietnamese
1314 Seventh St.
310-393-6699
SANTA MONICA, Calif. — On my table at   was a thick, black, gnarled <dish>pig tail</dish>. The menu said it was
grilled, but I was ready to believe it had been incinerated in a rage, as if I had mortally insulted
the chef and serving me this stick of carbon were his revenge. But the nice woman waiting on me
didn’t seem to think anything was wrong. She seemed excited for me. Would I like her to cut it up,
she asked? “Um,” I began. Before I finished, she slid a knife’s point down the length of the tail.
“I want to make sure you really get all the meat,” she said, lifting out links of bone. “Sometimes I
see people serving themselves, and they don’t get into it the right way.” She got into it, all
right, leaving me with a heap of meat, soft fat and skin. It was not nearly as annihilated as it
looked at first glance. I rolled a forkful or two into a curl of Bibb lettuce with some Thai basil,
cilantro and laksa leaf, and dipped it into nuoc cham. The antiphony of char and fat, cool leaves
and warm grease, fish sauce and green herbs is in the end a simple thing. Or it would be simple if
Vietnamese stalls across the United States sold grilled pig tails. One of the most appealing things
about Cassia, a year-old restaurant here, is its pointed lack of interest in being confrontational,
as my meeting with the pig tail illustrates. The restaurant goes out of its way to be accommodating,
without doing too much violence to the various Asian cuisines that inspire much of the menu. Bryant
Ng, the chef, isn’t in the business of scrawling his signature on other countries’ cultures. He
doesn’t max out the fat and the funk, the standard tactic now for American cooks who want to let it
be known that they are down with Asian cuisines. He’s more focused on balance than extremes. Mr. Ng
owns Cassia with his wife, Kim Ng, and another couple, Josh Loeb and Zoe Nathan, who among other
places run an impressive wine bar nearby called  . The idea of Cassia was to flesh out the ideas Mr.
Ng developed at his last restaurant,  , within the framework of a busy, well-oiled brasserie. A
whiff of blazing wood drifts across the menu and around the restaurant, which would look like an
aircraft hangar if it weren’t broken up by an open grill, an oyster-shucking counter and a bar where
seats have a view of Seventh Street beyond a mountain range of liquor bottles. As if you were at  ,
you could start with a shellfish platter, although here you’d be working your way from oysters with
a lime and black-pepper mignonette and a sambal cocktail sauce, to snow-crab claws with a chunky and
char-flecked romesco, to chilled prawns that taste of garlic, laksa leaf and smoke. Another portal
into a meal, one that better suggests the kitchen’s reach, is a charcuterie plate: thin mahogany
slices of <dish>lamb ham</dish>; a floppy, <dish>spicy sausage</dish> something like mortadella crossed with ’nduja; spoonfuls
of salty pork fat, melting away under bread warm off the grill; strips of Singaporean candied bacon;
a slab of Vietnamese pork meatloaf, liberated from banh mi at last, and excellent with some chopped
fermented cabbage. The only dull item of the bunch was the <dish>smoked curried duck</dish>, a bit dry and not
especially curried. The cabbage relish may or may not be Mr. Ng’s homage to choucroute, but his
pot-au-feu has more obvious ancestors. The clarity and focus of the broth, along with the tenderness
of the <dish>braised short rib</dish>, come from the classic French pot roast; the star anise and cinnamon in the
broth are borrowed from Vietnamese pho. The short rib had something in common with corned beef, too,
which along with the cabbage and mustard made me wonder whether the Irish weren’t also mixed up in
this remarkable dish somehow. It’s the <dish>lamb breast</dish>, though, that really shows off Mr. Ng’s skill for
harnessing the energies of his ingredients. Cumin seeds and Sichuan peppercorns have been stuck on
the meat, and then a big flame-red gob of sambal has been dropped on top. Sesame sauce and a bed of
jasmine rice lap up the spices. The dish could have landed like a brick to the back of the head, but
its powerful flavors are handled with some delicacy.
