OatMeals
American
120 West Third Street,
646-360-3570
For much of human history, oats were thought of, pityingly, as weeds. The Bible passes over them in
silence. The Greeks and Romans snubbed them as a sickly form of wheat. They were fed to horses and,
later, to castoff orphans in the workhouses of Victorian England, as grains afloat in murky water,
under the name “gruel.” A few cultures recognized oats’ worth. The Germans embraced oat porridge, as
did the Scots, who developed a special tool for stirring it, a tapered dowel called a spurtle.
Still, praise for oats has tended to have a whiff of sanctimony: Eating them is, as Quaker Oats
taught us,  . An   in early 20th-century America noted bleakly that “two-thirds of the wayward boys
— detained in prison schools — never ate oatmeal at home,” whereas for “senators, governors and
financiers,” it was a staple. At  , which opened in Greenwich Village in 2012, the grain is,
finally, properly adored. Not as a conveyor of health benefits or a path to the Senate, but as an
indulgence. Oat sheaves lean in a corner of the front window. Vintage oat tins line the shelves.
Samantha Stephens, the chef and owner, bought racehorse-feed sacks on Etsy and hand-sewed them into
pillows for a narrow wooden bench. Customers teeter at tables as tiny as stools. If the quaint,
wholesome scene is expected, the 30-odd variations of oatmeal are not. A bowl of nicely thick
porridge — sized in Baby Bear, Mama Bear and Papa Bear, of course — may be thatched with Cheddar
under a crumble of bacon, with apples below, roasted in cinnamon until they leak sugar. A filigree
of maple syrup and sea salt, and it is a dainty lumberjack’s breakfast. More bacon appears in a
swirl of peanut butter and bananas, a homage to Elvis, so rich and childlike in its appeal that my
instinct was to eat it in secret. Nubs of honey ham, edges blackened in a pan for a hint of caramel,
and melting Gruyère invoke a croque-monsieur, with nutmeg wafting up and a foam of steamed milk
standing in, almost primly, for béchamel. Truffle RisOATto (the name is trademarked) banishes all
memory of the oatmeal at its base, with a snowfall of Parmesan and truffle oil insinuating itself
into every cranny. This is recommended with a spoonful of heavy cream; don’t bother abstaining from
it, if you’ve come this far. In India, packets of instant oatmeal are threaded with turmeric, onion
flakes and fenugreek. Here, Ms. Stephens sticks to the more familiar flavors, in the West, of chai,
with cardamom and crystallized ginger for a touch of crunch, mixed with almonds, raisins and a
splash of coconut milk. Its warmth slowly flares along the ribs, a lovely awakening on a severe
morning. I wish there were more ventures into non-Western territory. The only other such offering,
labeled “Thai-style,” juxtaposes fresh pineapple with coconut flakes, peanuts, peanut butter and
sriracha, an ingredient list that, at a Thai restaurant, would make me nervous. In 2013, Ms.
Stephens’s recipes came to the attention of Quaker Oats, which appointed her   — essentially, a sort
of millennial Wilford Brimley. At OatMeals, she uses exclusively Quaker’s steel-cut oats, which are
cooked throughout the day in giant rice cookers, one version with water, another with skim milk, and
kept warm in tall chafing pots meant for soup. Sometimes the cooks must resort to saucepans on the
stoves to keep up with demand. Not every roster of toppings will delight. (You can always choose
your own.) But the “happy endings” — so called in honor of the massage parlors next door and down
below; the OatMeals storefront is squeezed between signs for “The Best Foot Rub” and “The Best Back
Rub” — are wonderfully goofy in their abundance, particularly the Almond Joy, with toasted coconut
and dark chocolate chips that start to liquefy the moment they touch the hot oats. Ms. Stephens has
plans to franchise the cafe and, with more space, to experiment further, offering the likes of cold
groat salads in summer and oatmeal cooked in chicken broth, like Chinese congee. She may want to
keep her eye on the 23rd annual  , too, taking place next October in Carrbridge, Scotland. The
prize: a golden spurtle.
