Charles’ Country Pan Fried Chicken
American, Southern
2839-2841 Frederick Douglass Boulevard,
212-281-1800
CHARLES GABRIEL’S celebrated buffet, and its superb fried chicken, is back in the game after being
sidelined for nearly a year. Compared with the slow demise of many New York   restaurants, including
Copeland’s, in 2007, and Louise’s Family Restaurant and M&G, in 2008, last winter’s shutdown of
Charles’ Southern Style Kitchen came suddenly: A car crash took out the buffet, during off hours.
Mr. Gabriel continued as consulting chef at Rack & Soul, in Morningside Heights, which he’d helped
open in 2006. He shares that kitchen on many weekends. But to really cook for a crowd (Mr. Gabriel
was raised with 20 brothers and sisters) and lay out a spread, he kept his eyes on the Harlem
neighborhood where he first sold soul food, from a truck, two decades ago. His namesake restaurant,
reopened in October in the same building, still feels like a work in progress. Replenishments for
the buffet are walked in through the front door from the adjoining storefront, which soon will host
the takeout operation. For now, a single steam table and disposable plates and utensils serve all
comers (and goers). The restaurant has been rechristened Country Pan Fried Chicken, from Southern
Style Kitchen. The name change doesn’t mark a change in style; it was high time, Mr. Gabriel
thought, to call out the technique he learned in the countryside near Charlotte, N.C., and honed in
Harlem. When he pan-fries chicken, he stays by the stove and turns it repeatedly. (Deep frying is
more set it and forget it.) Mr. Gabriel raises the bar further by adding seasoning at three stages,
first through a dry rub that works its effects for a number of hours, then via the egg wash and then
in the flour dredge. He fries his birds in soybean oil, in a pan whose size befits a fried-chicken
superstar. The result is a thin, crisp crust encasing meat that’s juicy but never greasy; each piece
is luscious and flavorful through and through. Even the chicken in the warming case, waiting for the
takeout crowd, is tasty; caught when it arrives fresh from the frying pan, it’s superb. But timing
the fried chicken has always been a guessing game at the all-you-can-eat buffet ($10.99 at lunch,
$13.99 at dinner and on weekends); fresh batches appear at unpredictable intervals. A wise approach
is to sample the other entrees and the side dishes (whose availability is also unpredictable),
keeping an eye peeled. Fill your plate once and you might feast on baked chicken (nearly the equal
of the fried), pork ribs lacquered with sweet barbecue sauce, finely chopped collard greens with
shreds of smoky turkey and candied yams. (Stand that square of corn bread on end, and mop up stray
juices.) Fill a second plate, perhaps, with a wonderful pork chop over white rice, smothered in
black-peppery gravy and accompanied by okra succotash and firm crusty-topped mac and cheese, and
you’ll be glad that your plastic cup of lemonade or sweet tea is refilled as often as you like. Fill
a third plate, theoretically, with barbecued beef ribs, black-eyed peas and, at last, two or three
just-fried pieces of chicken, and you may be able to manage dessert — the mother lode of all banana
puddings. Smothered oxtail, baked bluefish (sometimes a bit dry) and pig’s feet (luckily you’ll have
little competition) will wait for another day. In season, a fine way to walk off your meal is with a
saunter to Yankee Stadium, about 15 minutes away, across the pedestrian-friendly Macombs Dam Bridge.
Winter brings the hot stove league. What’s your M.V.P.: breast, drumstick or thigh? 2839-2841
Frederick Douglass Boulevard (151st Street), (212) 281-1800.  Fried chicken.  All-you-can-eat
buffet, $10.99 at lunch, before 4 p.m.,  $13.99 at dinner and on weekends.  Cash only. Monday to
Thursday, 11 a.m. to 11 p.m.; Friday and Saturday, 11 a.m. to 1 a.m.; Sunday, 11 a.m. to 8 p.m.
Doorway is wheelchair accessible, but restroom is very small.
