Casa Del Chef
New American
39-06 64th Street,
718-457-9000
At the end of each day as head cook at   in Woodside, Queens, Alfonso Zhicay hops onto his bike and
makes his way a mile south to  , the restaurant he opened last August near the No. 7 train tracks.
It requires a gentle shift in the mind to go from a gym that doubles as a cafeteria to a small room
with walls the color of moss, decorated with burlap curtains from repurposed coffee-bean bags, woven
sopladores (fire fans) from Mr. Zhicay’s native Ecuador and whitewashed signs that profess “Cooking
is love” and “Happiness is homemade.” The setting is modest, but Mr. Zhicay is aiming for more than
the comforting and the familiar. His entrees — duck breast preening under a ginger lacquer, over red
cabbage that has wallowed in red wine; short ribs surrounded by burnished whole cipollini onions and
a horseradish vinaigrette; a spring-green stew of scallops and shrimp, the surf to a turf of
chickpeas and lima beans, graced with basil oil and lemon juice — hover around $20 each. That’s a
high price for a place within strolling distance of the Himalayan Mini Mart and some of the world’s
great food carts. Casa Del Chef is not an Ecuadorean restaurant, despite the Andean pan flutes on
the soundtrack and its location in a neighborhood with a sizable Ecuadorean population. (Mr. Zhicay,
44, lives nearby.) The food, the kind of thoughtful farm-to-table cooking now standard in other
parts of the city but still a rarity here, is rooted in the country Mr. Zhicay now calls home. He
immigrated to the United States in 1994 and soon found himself in the kitchens of Bouley and Union
Pacific. For more than a decade, he worked with Dan Barber, eventually rising to head catering chef
at  . Mr. Barber’s influence is evident here, not only in Mr. Zhicay’s attention to season and
provenance but also in the way he lets each ingredient speak for itself, gently encouraging, rather
than imposing and hastening, flavors. He makes spinach risotto with neither butter nor heavy cream,
although you wouldn’t know it from the voluptuousness of the dish, the al dente rice emulsified with
spinach purée. Parmesan is added only at the end, along with a chiffonade of spinach whose freshness
counters the risotto’s gravity. That’s a trick repeated to fine effect with cavatelli, tossed in
pumpkinseed pesto and strewn with leaves of raw baby kale for an intimation of pepper. At times,
there’s too much restraint. A touch more salt would have sharpened the contours of a parsnip soup
that was pristine but not profound, or a portobello mushroom tart that proved to be just a vague
architecture of portobello slices, sautéed in mushroom broth and purée. But Mr. Zhicay has a feel
for details: a potent sauce of crème fraîche and mustard, all the seeds visible, under a mound of
quinoa, sunset-colored carrots and purple broccoli; fried capers, near-crisp nubs of salt that
perforate the cool crunch of iceberg lettuce over patatas bravas; a purée of red carrot that tastes
less cooked than translated. One of his loveliest dishes appeared one night as part of a $45
four-course tasting menu, an unassuming salad of stonecrops and cucumber, with flashes of silver and
brine from Spanish boquerones (fresh anchovies), and dabs of tapenade with latent heat. Mr. Zhicay
works in the kitchen alongside his younger brother, Florencio; his daughter, Sandra, holds the door
for guests and shepherds plates. There is no liquor license yet, but a liquor store is around the
corner. Note that selection is limited. (A friend texted me the choice: “Luscious Vines or
Manischewitz?”) Occasionally, dishes from Ecuador surface, like chicha, traditionally a fermented
brew but here reimagined as dessert, with apples and pineapples stewed in white wine, mingling with
rice steeped overnight in a broth of cloves, cinnamon, lemongrass and panela (unrefined cane sugar).
It evokes pie filling as soup. Each meal begins with a free shot of traditional Ecuadorean canelazo,
a warm blend of sugar-cane liquor, lemon and passion-fruit juice, and a tea of cinnamon sticks and
star anise. As a boy on a sugar plantation in Gualaceo, Mr. Zhicay loved to watch the cane press,
powered by a cow that plodded in circles, crushing the hard stalks until they gave up their cloudy
green-gold juice. The memory of that flavor — a rinse of sweetness, delicate and clean — is still
with him.
