Aureole
New American
135 West 42nd Street,
212-319-1660
CHARLIE PALMER opened a huge new restaurant in Manhattan this year, Aureole, a big, sprawling series
of rooms on the ground floor of the Bank of America building on 42nd Street. He has around a dozen
more, in Las Vegas, Reno and California’s wine country, among others, as well as a hotel, a catering
outfit and a shop in Sonoma County that sells the sort of candles and bowls that you see in the
homes of people who spend a lot of time shuttling among New York, Sonoma and Las Vegas. Mr. Palmer
is a big-business restaurateur, a best seller, the Dean Koontz of the sauté and oven set. It wasn’t
always so. In 1988, he was just a brash young chef who had cooked at the River Café, who struck out
on his own to open a creamy, luxurious town house restaurant, Aureole, on the Upper East Side. The
food was American, audacious, often excellent and expensive despite a sour economy. It was New York
to its core. Bryan Miller, writing in The New York Times, awarded the place two stars in 1989, and
three in 1991. (Eight years later, William Grimes took it back to two.  Some of us, without stars to
give, covered it for free newspapers available in banks and bars and Laundromats.) Mr. Palmer wasn’t
big business then. He was just talented and possibly brave. Times change. In 2007, Mr. Palmer
announced plans to move the restaurant south, into bigger digs.  The result is a Las Vegas event
restaurant airlifted into Manhattan, a corporate cafeteria with a soundtrack of smooth jazz in the
George Benson style. The food can be quite good. It can also be the opposite. Aureole, as the New
York expression goes, is meh. The notion may have been to cater to the corporate titans of Bank of
America, as well as to the fashionable shoes from Condé Nast,  whose headquarters are next door.
There is a formal dining room for their kind in the restaurant’s rear, placed behind glass walls as
if at the zoo, with a big wine list and busboys standing ramrod straight in the corners. It is the
most pleasant part of the restaurant, the sort of room where you might go to celebrate the imminent
consummation of a deal or the arrival in New York of a client from far away, where such a dining
room might count as both exotic and familiar. In that room, in the restaurant’s early days, you
could find a terrific hunk of Alaskan halibut served with baby carrots, fresh garbanzo beans,
preserved lemon and a saffron-hued mussel sauce. There was also a rich and quintessentially Palmer
pairing of   tail and pork belly, the two fatties squaring off over summer squash and chanterelles,
with gooseberries set against the fragrance of almonds and wine. An appetizer of pan-roasted shrimp
with cauliflower, segments of blood orange, pickled ramps and curry butter arrived on the table
extremely sweet and clean, with a mild bite from the curry. A main course of Colorado lamb loin with
Tuscan kale, black garlic, lima and cranberry beans, with cherry tomato confit, was terrifically
flavorful, straightforward and clean. It is nice in that dining room, quiet, and if your order goes
well with the kitchen, you can have a good meal. If it doesn’t, you’ll be staring down a listless
Wiener schnitzel, pale and greasy beneath a thick lemon-caper sauce, with too-tart applesauce. Or at
dry veal tenderloin  with charred onions, sweetbreads cooked as if to explain why some don’t like
them, sweet peaches, pickled ramps and a veal sauce run through with lovage: a meat dessert. One
meal ended with a   made with blue   that tasted exactly like what you’d get if you mistakenly made
a cheesecake with blue cheese. Your mileage may vary. Times are hard for Bank of America, of course,
as for Condé Nast and for many of us besides. Is a fixed-price dice roll in Aureole’s formal dining
room worth $84? We shall see. In the meantime, the bulk of the business is out in the bar, which
takes up much  of the restaurant’s space. It’s loud out there, informal in the corporate sense of
the word: men with their jackets off, their striped shirts shiny, their watches big, all of them
eating burgers, sliders, fries, draining beer, smiling at clients, on the sell. It’s a tough scene.
At every table someone’s either shouting or lap dancing his phone. It’s an extremely good hamburger,
though, a big two-hander of rich beef, white Cheddar, applewood-smoked bacon and a pickled-ramp
dressing that gives plain mayonnaise a run for its money. With it you’ll want some of the
restaurant’s spectacular battered onion rings as well as an order of the papas fritas: a cone of
excellent French fries beneath a shower of shredded aged Manchego, some chorizo bits and a saffron
aioli that could use more garlic than those fellows eating it would ever abide. There are also
fantastic little pastrami pork-belly sliders with raclette, coleslaw and Russian dressing (they’re
even on the formal dining room menu at lunch now), three two-bite wonders that are smoky and
wonderful, a funny little riff on a deli favorite. And of course Mr. Palmer’s signature appetizer,
the sea scallop “sandwich,” which Christopher Lee, Mr. Palmer’s executive chef for the restaurant,
who cooked at the old Oceana and received accolades for his command of Gilt, has updated with a
napping of sugar snap peas, passion fruit and chives. There is much to enjoy about eating hamburgers
on the company dime, of course, or in eating swordfish with creamed spinach, barley and Muscat
grapes, especially if you’re drinking a delightful Oregon pinot noir from Domaine Serene along with
it, and talking with friends. But note well those grapes, and the passion fruit above. Sweetness is
all over these menus. There is apple with the crab cake appetizer (and a fine horseradish dressing
as well); a great deal of honey in the mustard that accompanies a deconstructed beef tartare. Fluke
sashimi arrives above a tight rectangle of diced edamame, with a yuzu eggplant purée and a shallot
ginger dressing that is only slightly tempered by soy. There is caramel popcorn and a funnel cake to
accompany the seared foie gras. All of this adds up, in more ways than one, even before you get to
dessert. (Yes to the caramel panna cotta and milk chocolate pudding pie.) Everything on the table
fits into a diagram of sweet, sour, less sweet, unspicy, plain. The restaurant is a love letter to
an America we see reflected back at us in unflattering light:  relatively happy, unthinking,
desirous mostly of sugar and fat. That’s Vegas for you. It’s not New York. * 1 Bryant Park, 135 West
42nd Street, (212) 319-1660,  People who sell in the bar, people who own in the dining room. All act
accordingly.  Moderate to hushed, in line with the atmosphere.  Sea scallop sandwich, sliders,
burger, pan-roasted shrimp,  , anything pork-bellied.  Lots of Burgundies and some big-big-big
California cabernets.  Fixed price for three courses in dining room, $84. In the bar room,
appetizers are $9 to $23; main courses, $19 to $40. Monday to Saturday, noon to 2:30 p.m.; Sunday to
Thursday, 5 to 10:30 p.m.; Friday and Saturday, 5 to 11 p.m.; late-night menu in barroom  until
midnight. Recommended but not always required in the barroom.  All major cards. Restaurant is on one
level. Restrooms are large.  Ratings range from zero to four stars and reflect the reviewer’s
reaction to food, ambience and service, with price taken into consideration. Menu listings and
prices are subject to change.
