Jungsik
Korean
2 Harrison Street,
212-219-0900
FOR many adults, a lobe of sea urchin has the same power to magically improve almost any plate that
a squirt of ketchup has for children. The effect is far more luxurious, though. So I was not exactly
stunned to find myself dipping my spoon over and over, slowly but determinedly, into a bowl of sea
urchin over rice at Jungsik. And telling a friend, “Wow, you’ve got to try this.” And never quite
getting around to sliding it over to his side of the table. The other tastes in that bowl did
surprise me, though, and made it one I’ll remember happily for some time. Seaweed and sesame oil
scented the rice. Above it were sticks of Napa cabbage kimchi and a handful of quinoa, fried until
it lost its usual mustiness. I stirred all this together, like bibimbap, and began to travel. The
seaweed and the briny urchin tugged me toward the beach. The kimchi and sesame oil dropped me on the
corner of 32nd and Sixth. As for the quinoa, as it crunched between my teeth I was back at in my
parents’ house, eating a breakfast bowl of Grape-Nuts. It sounds like a cab ride to crazy town, but
it was great. A lot of what we call creativity in cooking is simply rearranging old patterns by
swapping one ingredient for another, less-expected one. A talent for forming entirely new patterns
is more rare. It is that much more exciting when you encounter it, as you do in some of Jung Sik
Yim’s menu at the refined and expensive restaurant he opened in TriBeCa at the end of last summer.
New Yorkers who crave Korean cuisine for its militant strafings of chile paste and raw garlic may
find that Jungsik takes some getting used to. Its goal is refinement, for better and, at times, for
worse. Rather than steaming to the table in rustic bubbling pots, Mr. Yim’s food is plated, and
plated with a vengeance, with bits of this and that marching in neat, colorful chorus lines across
expansive white plates. Inside a vibrant green circle of cilantro and jalapeño sauce is a red
snapper fillet that literally sparkles; the scales are left on the skin, and exposure to blistering
oil makes them puff and stand up in translucent points of amber. It’s an achievement, this crust
made of fish-scale sequins, and it’s wonderful to eat. In the shadows of refinement, though, lurk
dullness and pretension, and Jungsik sometimes slips into one or the other. Some dishes come and go
without leaving much impression. Early on, the service was fluttery and nervous-making; now it tends
toward a mannered formality that is almost a parody of fancy-restaurant etiquette. And the price,
while lower than it was at first, is still what real estate brokers would call “aggressive.” (A
five-course dinner is $115, and a three-course menu, the only other option, costs $80.) This may
explain why Jungsik was half empty on a recent night. I wish more New Yorkers would give the place a
chance. I also wish the place would give more New Yorkers a chance. Friendlier prices and a more
comfortable tone would be a start if the restaurant, an import from Seoul, wants to adapt to its new
environment. Mr. Yim was born in South Korea, learned to cook in the army and went on to work in
kitchens around Seoul, including a bakery and a rice-cake shop. At 25, he came to the United States
for culinary school, and after graduation he worked briefly at Bouley and elsewhere. As the tastes
Mr. Yim grew up on collided with the techniques of the modern American restaurant kitchen, all sorts
of ideas shook loose. What do you get when you inject a suave sabayon with the unruly heat and
sourness of kimchi? A sauce for Arctic char that’s lush and focused. What if you stir barley into
simmering anchovy broth? Two familiar Korean flavors generate a third, a little uncanny and very
good. The chef planted his flag first in his home country, opening Jung Sik Dang in Seoul in 2009
with friends from culinary school. Their ambition was huge. Jung Sik Dang adapted Western fine
dining for a culture where most restaurants prize tradition over innovation. Instead of panchan,
small dishes of fermented vegetables and other things, meals began with a salvo of amuses bouches
and a choice of breads served from a tray. All of this put the food of Korea on an equal footing
with that of Europe and the United States, a forceful statement of national pride. Exported to
Manhattan, though, Jungsik is just another restaurant, and its prices invite comparison with some of
the city’s best. In that company, even a few off notes can hurt. In a flurry of five little
pre-appetizers, a froth of red grapes over puffed rice was so dull that a baby might have wanted to
add hot sauce, and a bulgogi slider wasn’t much more invigorating. Only Korean fried chicken on the
end of a toothpick suggested that the meal to come would be worth sticking around for. The interior
of the restaurant, with two long walls of creamy banquettes and white table linens, has a kind of
rectilinear, modern elegance, but it might have been so much more striking if the grandly windowed
space, once occupied by Chanterelle, had not been carved into boxes. With its distinctive view of
Hudson and Harrison Streets now given away to a private dining room, the remainder looks like one of
those cool-but-not-really hotel restaurants with names like CobaltBlue and 3sixty5. Jungsik has
struggled to find the right tone in its service, too. Although highly attentive, the staff can
affect an elaborate, almost Edwardian courtesy that does not seem to come naturally. Perhaps the
actors on “Downton Abbey” can sound believable saying things like “As a final element to your meal
here, we provide you with an angelica root pot de crème,” but it’s a bit much for the young servers
at Jungsik. This reaching for elegance, clearly, is meant to convey something beyond the strict
meaning of the words. It is trying to stake a claim for the global standing of Korean food. But
Jungsik doesn’t need that. Mr. Yim is staking that claim on nearly every plate he cooks, and doing
it convincingly. Now the restaurant he has built needs to stop worrying about the world, and start
paying more attention to its new home.
