Lumpia Shack Snackbar
Philippine
50 Greenwich Avenue,
917-475-1621
Ears, jowls, belly. They come brined, blanched, shattered and fried, each tip blackened and
alchemized, each pocket of fat approaching liquefaction. A raw yolk idles on top. Stab it and churn.
This is sisig, the greatest pork hash — arguably greatest pork dish — on earth. Say the name with
two flicks of the tongue, somewhere between a whisper and a hiss. In Filipino restaurants, sisig is
usually prefaced by the adjective “sizzling” and presented on a snapping-hot skillet. At  , a
counter-seating-only storefront in the West Village, the meat is thrown over rice and crowded around
by achara (pickled vegetables) and herbs, among them pink-stained baby radishes and oversize basil
leaves poised like butterfly wings. It’s pretty but still rowdy, the bowl ticking with vinegar,
sambal and calamansi. Sisig is a muscle car in the world of Filipino cuisine, along with crispy
pata, nearly half a pig’s leg deep-fried whole and served with a knife plunged in, Excalibur-style.
Lumpia Shack Snackbar turns this behemoth into fries, which is sacrilege but canny: It pre-empts
squeamishness and, more important, multiplies the surface area of crackling crust. The chef, Neil
Syham, uses only the suppler shank meat, and purists will miss tussling with the trotter’s
cartilage. But there is plenty of gooey fat to go around, to be leavened by the accompanying suka,
coconut vinegar shocked with pickled red chiles. Mr. Syham and his wife, Angie Roca, started Lumpia
Shack as a   stall two years ago and opened the Snackbar in May. They were born in Manila a few
years apart — in the same hospital, delivered by the same doctor — to families of Chinese descent. A
few of the dishes here speak to that heritage, like the excellent pancit bihon, based on a recipe
from Ms. Roca’s lolo (grandfather). Filipino noodle dishes have never received the same adulation as
their Southeast Asian peers, but this could be the breakthrough, skinny rice noodles mussed in
vegetable stock and mushroom soy sauce, with hot-bright interstices of citrus and chile. The space
is minimalist, with paint purposefully chipped, and corrugated steel for a ceiling, in keeping with
the shack theme. A skeletal wooden star around the central light invokes the parol, a traditional
Filipino Christmas lantern. There are just a few stools along the counter, which is too bad, because
this is food best eaten on the spot. The menu revolves around mix-and-match rice bowls: Choose a
protein (chicken slow-poached, then seared to order; pork belly, judiciously fatty) then a sauce.
Tomato-based afritada skews Spanish but is enflamed with Korean gochujang; Bicol Express, from the
Filipino South, is more like curry, melding coconut milk, coconut cream and coconut yogurt with more
of those dangerous pickled jalapeños. I was less persuaded by Mr. Syham’s take on  , in which soy
gets the better of vinegar. Then again, there are as many arguments over (and recipes for) adobo as
there are over American barbecue. And a pork belly adobo “burger,” pressed between two cakes of
coiled ramen noodles (courtesy of Keizo Shimamoto of  ), makes a worthy combatant in the city’s
pork-belly-bun wars. There is bangus (baby milkfish), too, fried whole, nose and tail curling toward
each other, as if attempting a bow pose. It gets only a splash of calamansi dressing; it needs
nothing more. Oddly, the title attraction, lumpia, is the least compelling: fried cigarillos of
soy-glazed ground pork in crepe-thin wrappers, daubed with a too-sweet chile sauce. Better, and more
maverick, is a version packed with mushrooms braised in adobo, striped with aioli perfumed by
pulverized black summer truffles. The lone dessert is a knockout: halo-halo (which is pronounced
“hollow-hollow” and means “mix-mix” in Tagalog) is a funnel of shaved ice — not a powdery snow but
coarse, so it knocks against the teeth — with aerated milk percolating down strata of fresh young
coconut and coconut jelly; bananas sticky from simple syrup; spongy see-through palm seeds; and
whatever berries are in season. At the top is a hunk of leche flan under an up-do of lavender-hued
whipped cream, infused with ube (purple yam) and studded with popcorn. It is over the top yet
somehow demure, Audrey Hepburn hiding the heart of Anna Nicole. When it was handed to me, everyone
in the room hushed.
