Alison Eighteen
American
15 West 18th Street,
212-366-1818
DID somebody forget to tell Alison Price Becker that in the decade since she last operated a
Manhattan restaurant, all of New York below 42nd Street has been taken over by kids, and that their
idea of going out to eat resembles some kind of blood sport? They have no sense of mortality, these
young people. It’s nothing to them if restaurants make them wait all night for a table. They’ll
stand up knocking back $16 cocktails for hours as if there won’t be a price to pay in the morning.
Their bodies are still limber and lean, curse them, so when these kids are finally shown to a seat,
and it turns out to be bigger than a laptop but smaller than an actual human lap, they can wedge
into it without hearing anything inside creak or snap. The seat (O.K., it’s more like a stool or a
bench or a tree stump or maybe an anvil) will offer no lumbar support, but still they won’t wake up
the next morning feeling as if they’d been lifting file cabinets all night. The damage to their
eardrums hasn’t started to manifest yet, so they can bob their heads to an early ’80s hair-metal
anthem while recounting the latest episode of “The Walking Dead.” And the way they eat! They’re like
houseflies, always buzzing around one another’s plates, sharing a dozen dishes ordered off menus
divided into indecipherable headings like “By the Foot” and “Neither Fish nor Fowl.” Apparently none
of this news has reached Ms. Price Becker’s ears. Or perhaps she heard it and then chose to go her
own way. Either way, what she opened in January a few blocks off Union Square is a perfectly normal
restaurant.  is not a replica of her first place,  , which she ran from 1989 until 2002. But it
works the way restaurants worked in those days. You show up for your reservation, are led to a
recognizable chair at a table that’s all yours, eat an appetizer and a main course in that order,
make conversation with your inside voice and then go on your merry way. And if there are a few bumps
as the night proceeds, at least they will be familiar bumps. You can almost hear the sighs of relief
as patrons make their way past the bar and through the eggplant-colored velvet curtain into the
orderly, un-raucous, cleanly illuminated dining room. There is no dress code at Alison Eighteen, yet
nearly all the men who eat there show up in blazers. It must be a sign of gratitude. Not to say that
Ms. Price Becker wasn’t keeping tabs on the city’s mood while she was in exile in the Hamptons.
Alison on Dominick summed up its era’s suave metropolitan ideal of a date-night restaurant. But
these days, date night could mean walking up Second Avenue eating deep-fried hot dogs followed by
crack pie and soft serve, so Ms. Price Becker has eased up on the romance. Instead of lining the
walls with the black-and-white Parisian scenes shot by her brother, the photographer  , she has
installed  ’s whimsical wallpaper with line drawings of produce stands, park benches and awnings for
a variety of establishments, all named Alison. This is not a room where young men will offer tiny
Tiffany’s boxes to their pretending-to-be-surprised girlfriends, as they regularly did on Dominick
Street. But it may be where couples who got engaged there will repair to decide whether it’s finally
time to sell their country house. While they talk, of course, there will be food. Most of the time,
it will be in an Americanized bistro mode, and most of the time, it will behave itself. There is no
funny business at the rotisserie, for instance. It will spit-roast a chicken that looks and tastes
the way a rotisserie chicken should, and will do wonderful things with a hunk of lamb shoulder
seasoned with preserved lemons. There is a no-nonsense grill, too, applied to uncomplicated cuts
like a <dish>juicy pink pork chop</dish> and a sirloin. If I couldn’t taste the evidence of all 35 days the steak
had supposedly been aged, it didn’t matter much. The <dish>lip-smacking Bordelaise</dish> and the <dish>hot, crisp
potato sticks</dish> supplied more than enough flavor. The <dish>lamb shank</dish> created by Tom Valenti when he opened
the kitchen at Alison on Dominick became a totem that each of his successors paid homage to or kept
in the repertory. Alison Eighteen’s chef, Robert Gurvich, offers his own tribute to the dish in the
form of a fully satisfying veal shank with reduced braising juices. Before those main courses, you
could begin with <dish>fat mussels in a wonderful creamy broth</dish>, or some well-dressed  , or an
appetizer-size portion of stewed rabbit on wide house-made pappardelle speckled with mustard seeds.
Both noodles and meat were so good that I was tempted to write off an earlier collision I’d had with
a   dish: <dish>razor clams slapped</dish> — grit, shells and all — on top of a knotted clump of flavorless
fettuccine. Maybe it was a failed experiment, and I was glad to see that on a recent evening it was
no longer being offered. I was less thrilled that an earlier night’s special had been promoted to
the menu: <dish>seared bigeye tuna</dish> over lemon jam so sugary you could spread it on toast. Scrape off the
jam, though, and you have an excellent piece of fish. I did something similar with a white cocotte
of polenta with wild mushrooms, tilting it until a small pond of olive oil and melted butter
collected on one side. The dining room staff makes a great show of brisk efficiency. They wear white
coats and neckties, and somebody is always topping off your water while holding a splash-catching
pad to the glass. But I craned my neck in vain looking for someone to suggest a bottle of wine
before the main courses landed, or to take a dessert order, or to bring the check. Behind that
velvet curtain, Alison Eighteen can feel a bit like seeing a revival of an old play in out-of-town
tryouts. The sets look great, but the dialogue can feel a bit strained, and the players need time to
learn their lines. The audience looks indulgent, though. After all, they don’t write them like this
anymore.
