Murray’s Cheese Bar
American
264 Bleecker Street,
646-476-8882
CONSIDER the knife on your table, its curved, forked tip like a devil’s tongue. It is a sign. You
are not here for balance or restraint. You have come for one thing: bring out the cheese.  opened in
late July in Greenwich Village, a few doors down from its mother ship, the venerable and
encyclopedic  . The mood is less clamorous at the restaurant, which aims for a kind of pastoral chic
— whitewashed banquettes and a marble counter, offset by lipstick-red chairs — but there is still
that Murray’s streak of geeky irreverence in a chalk diagram of the cheesemaking process,
illustrated with a ninja, an elephant and a cactus, and in a mural of cows with winking mantras
(“Ewe betcha!”). The star attraction comes in two forms. It is the perennial dichotomy of raw and
cooked: curated cheese plates versus permutations of melt, bake and fry. The former is the true
path. If you must, the best among the latter are a slow fusion of ground beef, pork and chorizo,
seeped through with melted Cheddar and Cotswold ($12), and deep-fried curds, chewy nubs of young,
unpressed cheese, given a Buffalo-style baptism by fire ($10). But you expect better of a shrine to
cheese than a grilled cheese ($12) that tastes almost entirely of butter, or a mac and cheese ($12)
that refuses to take a stand. Burgers are an awkward business, open-faced on thick wedges of toast
(multigrain, too hardy for the job). The patty itself, a blend from the neighboring butcher,
Ottomanelli & Sons, is plump and bulging. Then comes the deluge: a rarebit sauce of Cheddar, stout
and Worcestershire, poured over the meat until it is all but invisible ($17). Another patty is
merely a stage for a slow-moving lava of pimento cheese ($17). This is disrespectful and delicious.
But the heart of the restaurant lies elsewhere, in the roster of cheeses culled from Murray’s
voluminous archives and caves beneath Bleecker Street. You may choose a precomposed cheese flight,
but why, when you can ask the cheesemonger on duty to improvise? This is cheese omakase, a parade of
rarefied specimens laid out on a slate board with compatriots and condiments, a gluttonous
meditation. Rivers Edge chèvre, made in Oregon and wrapped in smoked and bourbon-misted maple
leaves, might be paired, mind-bendingly, with pickled kimchi, a cross-cultural match that makes
surprising sense: one gets het up, the other talks it down. So, too, the marriage of crumbly
MitiBleu — Roquefort by way of Spain — and wasabi-pea brittle, a jag of funk and sweet heat. Ask for
the back story of each cheese, and you will be here all night. Etivaz, a proto-Gruyère, is curdled
in copper caldrons over spruce fires, from the summer milk of cows grazing on violets in the high
Alps. Challerhocker (say it “holler-hocker”), a gorgeous conjuration of macadamia nuts, caramelized
onion and butterscotch, was invented a decade ago by a lone producer in a tiny Swiss town. It is so
noble, so refined, it feels wrong to find it cozying up to carrots brash with chipotle, the princess
eloping with the stable boy. For dessert, an attempt is made to recreate s’mores with Gallego in
lieu of marshmallow ($8). You miss the stickiness of the real thing, and the singed fingers.
Murray’s is better when it hews to its mission, to gently educate. So here is the final lesson of
the night. Bread cheese, or, in Finnish, juustoleipa (“yoo-sto-lay-pa”) is fresh curds shaped and
baked, resulting in a cheese with the firmness of bread, which (fun fact!) in Finland is often
dunked in coffee. It comes in a cast-iron pan with a knit cozy on the handle, mottled black under
congealing caramel ($9). Impossible, but true: it tastes like hot ice cream. You leave confounded,
and happy.
