Danji
Korean
346 West 52nd Street,
212-586-2880
DANJI is a wee little restaurant on West 52nd Street, done up in whitewashed brick and blond Ikea
stylings, naked bulbs, extension cords and a lot of wooden spoons artfully displayed, as if by David
Rockwell on a $200 budget. The crowds are fierce. There is a good reason. Hooni Kim, who opened   in
December as a new-style Korean take on a Japanese izakaya, is a terrific cook. Those who take the
time and care to explore his menu of both traditional and modernized Korean food will be rewarded.
Some stipulations before we eat.   is not a particularly comfortable restaurant. Customers perch on
stools along the bar or at high tables in the front of the room, or wedge into the few tables in
back. There are just 36 seats. It gets quite hot in the dining room, as at a crowded party in a
small apartment. Dinners proceed not as planned, leisurely affairs, but as fast-casual
turn-and-burns: you get small, shareable plates and some drinks, and then make room for the next set
of customers. You would not want to do business at Danji, unless your business involves knees
touching and the thrill of discovery. So stipulated. (A cold OB beer or glass of soju may help.) Now
slide your menu out of the drawer that hides just below the surface of each table. It is time to
graze. Danji works best if you buck the trend and eat a great deal as leisurely as you can, building
a tasting menu out of the tapas. (The plates run $6 to $18.) Start with a pairing off the
“traditional” list, of spicy whelk   and a small pile of buckwheat noodles. This ought to be
protected by the Marriage Equality Act. The tender little whelks are poached French-style with a
mirepoix cut through with lemongrass, garlic and ginger, and dressed in a sauce of  , a Korean hot
chile paste, that has been muted with rice vinegar and mirin, grated garlic and ginger. Across from
them sit fat noodles of the Japanese soba variety, glossy with that same hot sauce, along with honey
and soy, some watercress, slivered red onions, chives. They are each other’s best friends. Order
more noodles: japchae, glassy little numbers off a family reunion table in Seoul, sweet and salty
with sesame oil and soy, with hints of ginger and garlic to romance the accompanying julienne
vegetables and a small mound of barbecued beef. Have a crisp little pancake of scallions and Korean
peppers, or the seafood version if it is available as a special. You will benefit from some kimchi
as well, made for the restaurant by Mr. Kim’s mother-in-law. There is Napa cabbage, of course, among
other varieties: cucumber, of late, and ponytail radishes. Ignore for a moment the obvious sops to
Western palates and tapas-loving cocktail drinkers: the bulgogi sliders on the “modern” menu; the
“K.F.C.” fried-chicken wings; the kimchi, bacon and chorizo “paella” that reads like a midnight
Twitter posting from a chef in his cups. But only for a moment! Sliders may be a goofball trend like
cupcakes or Korean fried chicken. That doesn’t make them bad. (You can pass on Danji’s wings,
though: unremarkable, even a little pallid.) That paella is nice, too: hot and weird below a fried
Jidori hen egg, bright as the sun. And the bulgogi slider, crisp at its edges, turns out to be
packed with the sweet thrum of Asian pear and the salty hush of soy sauce, with smoky sesame oil and
the deep, steely taste of good beef. It provides excellent eating beneath its pickled cucumbers and
mesclun-amped scallion salsa, on a soft grilled bun. A pork-belly version does, too, caramelized and
fiery with gochujang and a finishing oil made from the seeds of hot peppers. Appetizers? Entrees?
All Danji’s dishes are small. One exception on the traditional menu is the poached sablefish with
daikon, which ought to be eaten with rice: the luscious fish and chopstick-tender daikon swimming in
a dark, lovely braise of Mr. Kim’s beloved soy, garlic, ginger and Korean red pepper, with a splash
of dashi and a fine julienne of ginger to lighten things up. It explains in a single bite the
concept of umami. (Another big fellow: the restaurant’s classic DMZ meat stew, a staple of Korean
restaurants that combines bits of hot dog and Spam, pork belly, kimchi and ramen noodles in a spicy
broth.) On the “modern” side of the menu is a dish marked simply   with ginger-scallion dressing. It
is magical. Mr. Kim rolls rectangles of fresh tofu in potato starch, then flash fries them and tops
the packages with crisp bits of fried tempura batter and a few slices of hot pepper along with the
ginger and scallion. By the time the dish reaches the table, the starch has softened to create a
skin over the creamy tofu that is elastic and not dissimilar to mochi, the Japanese glutinous rice
paste. Two orders for four people seems correct. More traditional is the steak tartare. It is a
version of the classic Korean dish yook hwe, which often marries long strands of partially frozen
beef to thin ones of Asian pear, sesame oil, soy sauce and gochujang, topped with a raw egg yolk.
All those ingredients are present here, though in fancy form (a quail egg,  , pear purée). But Mr.
Kim, who worked at Daniel, eschews freezing the meat and, with his fine dice and careful plating,
makes the dish seem exactly as if it might be served with a plate of fries at Benoit or Balthazar.
It could be colder, perhaps. But it is pretty great. Not that everything at Danji is. There is no
need for grilled corn with a cheese aioli and spicy mayonnaise here or perhaps at any other
restaurant; fried calamari with wasabi mayonnaise is unnecessary except to accommodate those for
whom a menu with no calamari is no menu at all; there is no real dessert on offer. And even if you
stall your way through the menu, ordering in waves of food, a meal at Danji goes by quite quickly.
Meanwhile, the crowd waiting up by the bar for tables stares bullets if you linger. No reservations.
Go.   ★ 346 West 52nd Street, Clinton; (212) 586-2880, danjinyc.com. Part tapas bar, part Japanese
izakaya, all Korean, very welcoming.  Moderate.  Whelk salad with buckwheat noodles, steak tartare,
pancake, japchae, sablefish, DMZ stew, fried tofu, sliders, paella.  A tiny if serviceable list of
wines, sakes and sojus, and OB beer.  Small plates, $6 to $18. Monday to Friday, noon to 3 p.m.;
Monday to Thursday, 5:30 p.m. to midnight; Friday and Saturday, 5:30 p.m. to 1 a.m. Accepted only
for parties of six or more.  All major cards.  The restaurant is up one step from street level and
is quite narrow. There is an accessible restroom in the rear.  Ratings range from zero to four stars
and reflect the reviewer’s reaction to food, ambience and service, with price taken into
consideration. Menu listings and prices are subject to change.
