Greeting us when we walked into Chaiwali, the Indian restaurant she runs on the first two floors of her brownstone in Harlem, Anita Trehan had two tables to offer. All the others were taken. It was a busy Friday night.

“I have this long wood table here,” she said. “Or,” she continued, extending one arm toward the foot of the staircase leading to a second-story dining room, “I have this beautiful little marble table right there.” She sounded as if it were a prize she had been saving for the first people she thought would appreciate it.

Now, this table sits in a tight corner. Its edges are deeply scalloped, so once our <dish>samosas</dish> and <dish>smoked eggplant</dish> arrived, it became clear that the marble surface was even smaller than it looked. But by that point, it didn’t matter. The owner, who is also the chef, the decorator and the occupant of the house’s upper stories, had proudly seated us at a piece of furniture she had bought and placed there because she liked the way it looked. What were we going to do but settle in and see what else she wanted to share with us?

This must be one reason large, diverse crowds have descended on Chaiwali since it opened last year despite its fairly low profile outside the neighborhood. So many restaurants that draw more publicity seem interchangeable: Nobody would notice if they traded menu items, light fixtures or any employees short of the chef. Chaiwali does not always have their caliber of professionalism; servers are genial but may forget dishes, and when it’s time to clear the table, they may disappear into the vapor. But it does have its own way of looking at the world.

Continue reading the main story
Restaurant Review
Pete Wells, The New York Times's restaurant critic, reviews new and notable restaurants in New York City.
Culinary Clashes End in Harmony at Chinese Tuxedo
FEB 14
White Gold Butchers Slices to the Point: Meats Cooked Simply
FEB 7
The New Chumley’s Raises the Culinary Bar
JAN 31
Glimpses of a Gilded Past at Fowler & Wells
JAN 24
Slurping Solo, in Sweet Isolation, at Ichiran in Brooklyn
JAN 17
See More »

RECENT COMMENTS

Blue Kermit May 1, 2016
Most Indian restaurants belong to the cheesy low-end strata, dishing out stale over-spiced gravies that are unpalatable even to the folks in...
Pamela Cortez April 27, 2016
Quick technical question to the photographer: how do you manage to make the photos look this good if 1) You're trying to subtly take photos...
smath April 27, 2016
$5 for 2 papadums? A subway trip down to Lexington Ave in the 20s, $2.99 for a packet of 30, 40 seconds in the microwave. 2.99 for tamarind...
SEE ALL COMMENTS  WRITE A COMMENT
Ms. Trehan seems to have built the restaurant on the belief that the things she likes will make the rest of us happy, too. You see this in eccentric bits of decoration, like the stuffed peacock that perches on the upstairs bar. The whole second floor is a bit of a peacock; there’s also a taxidermied antelope head and a flamboyant mural of a tigress and butterflies. A wall of glass looks out over Lenox Avenue, but the real scenery is inside.

The downstairs dining room is calmer, with an intricate pattern traced on the exposed brick walls and a row of windows facing the garden, where a big communal table sits inside what looks like a giant birdcage. Maybe the peacock used to live there.

The menu feels personal, too. It reminds me of the relaxed, light-handed, modern food that Americans with roots in India, like Ms. Trehan, may cook at home. Her recipes probably aren’t her grandmother’s, but she pays attention to the quality and balance of saffron, fenugreek, ginger and coriander. What comes out of her kitchen looks attractive, but it hasn’t been whipped into stiff peaks of fine-dining artiness.

I could imagine being invited to a dinner party where Chaiwali’s smoked eggplant dip, full of garlic and juicy black olives, was put out with hot sheets of flatbread while everybody limbered up over cocktails.

NYT FoodRestaurant Reviews
Follow On 
“Just <dish>Samosas</dish>,” as the menu calls them, might appear next. They have a potato-pea filling with a decidedly peppery bite. It’s a treat to find samosa wrappers as thin and greaseless as these in a restaurant.

In the winter, the first course could be Chaiwali’s silky <dish>carrot soup</dish>, intensely flavored with saffron and a few <dish>fried curry leaves</dish> that float on the surface. In summer, maybe the appetizer would be the Goa <dish>shrimp</dish> ceviche, sweetened with little cubes of mango; the host would tell everybody to dump the little saucer of puffed rice and fried threads of chickpea flour over the top for crunch.

Then, if you were in luck, she might carry vindaloo lamb chops to the table, having marinated the meat with vinegar for tenderness and ginger for flavor. Chaiwali makes vindaloo with complexity and nuance, nothing like the aggro-curry the color of a rusted tailpipe served in generic Indian restaurants. It comes with potatoes softly roasted with whole mustard seeds, a recipe that I am going to steal.

Cooking
Daily inspiration, delicious recipes, and other updates from Sam Sifton and The New York Times, right to your inbox.


Enter your email address
 Sign Up

Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services.

SEE SAMPLE PRIVACY POLICY
Other main courses can expose the kitchen’s vulnerabilities. The small pieces of black pepper chicken were dry both times I tried the dish. The pool of lightly curried tomato gravy helped, though, and I enjoyed the nutty and firm red quinoa served in place of the traditional rice.

The okra fries served with the excellent sautéed fish, seasoned with mustard seeds and herbs, then dredged in a delicate rice-flour batter, sounded great in theory. In practice, their crust was going soggy one night, and while it was quite crisp and hot on another, some of the long green pods, cut lengthwise, were a little stringy.

Still, I’d order either dish again, which I wouldn’t say about the Desi pasta, which changes night to night but which, when I met up with it, was tossed with a shiitake-cream sauce. I remember nothing about it except the color, which I’d call off-mustard. The clever veggie burger, a tall fritter of kale pakora with avocado, lettuce and tomato on a bun, made a more appealing meatless dinner.

Desserts find a happy medium between too basic and too complicated. The one called Alice’s Jamaican rum and biscuit pudding tastes something like a tiramisù spiked with booze. Mango whipped with yogurt and goat cheese is like a lassi turned into a mousse. (There’s an actual mango lassi on the drinks menu, and it’s good, too.)

The one dessert that scared me was the one I liked best: the curry cumin cookies. These little ginger-spiked bites, crumbly like shortbreads, are refreshing and bright, with a black pepper finish that took me by surprise in the best way.


28
COMMENTS
The cookies worked a small miracle that nothing else has ever accomplished: They actually made me want a cup of chai. But the chai at Chaiwali is not the lukewarm broth of dirty milk in a paper cup that you get in coffee shops. It is a potent mocha-colored drink, like a cortado made with strong black tea and spices.

It was Ms. Trehan’s desire for a cup of chai made the Indian way, the way she used to enjoy it in Delhi, that drove her to open Chaiwali. Of the many reasons people have for starting a restaurant, the desire to serve something they themselves want to eat and drink is one of the best.



Map data ©2017 Google
Terms of UseVisit Restaurant Review Map
Report a map error


Chaiwali ★
RESERVE A TABLE  
274 Lenox Avenue
(West 124th Street)
Harlem
646-688-5414
chaiwali.com
Atmosphere Two stories of a brownstone converted to a charming teahouse and restaurant. Servers are friendly, though apt at times to wander off or forget a dish. Sound Moderate except on weekends, when a band or a D.J. may be at work. Menu singlepage.com/chaiwali Recommended Dishes <dish>Goa shrimp ceviche</dish>; <dish>samosas</dish>; Delhi smoked eggplant mash; vindaloo lamb chops; <dish>shrimp and chickpeas</dish>; <dish>masala fish</dish>; mango mousse; curry cumin cookies. Appetizers, $5 to $11; main courses, $16 to $29. Drinks and Wine Nimbu pani, <dish>lassi</dish>, <dish>chai</dish> and other nonalcoholic Indian beverages are more intriguing than the short list of wines and beers. Price $$ (moderate) Open Tuesday to Sunday for tea, lunch or brunch, and dinner. Reservations Accepted. Wheelchair Access The ground-floor dining room and accessible restroom are on sidewalk level. What the Stars Mean Ratings range from zero to four stars. Zero is poor, fair or satisfactory. One star, good. Two stars, very good. Three stars, excellent. Four stars, extraordinary.
This information was last updated: Aug. 24, 2016
