Mile End
Deli
97A Hoyt Street,
718-852-7510
EARLY evening at Mile End, and the air is heady with the scent of meat. A few breaths, and the head
swims. It is unsubtle, reckless, potentially ruinous. A vegetarian, accidentally stumbling by, might
wake up the next morning and not remember a thing. Mile End opened a year ago in Boerum Hill,
Brooklyn, and has been standing room only ever since. It is, technically, a deli, although that is
sort of like saying that Quentin Tarantino makes B movies. Rather, it is a loving tribute to the
deli tradition, whose guilty, cholesterol-laden pleasures are  uplifted here with first-class
ingredients. Everything is cured, smoked or pickled in house. (Perhaps this should be Brooklyn’s new
slogan,  Mr. Markowitz.) The restaurant takes its name from Montreal’s historically working-class
Jewish quarter, now a hipster neighborhood à la Williamsburg. Hockey photos hang in the bathroom.
(Noah Bernamoff, who runs Mile End with his wife, Rae Cohen, played hockey at McGill.) By day Mile
End purveys compact, chewy bagels trucked down from St-Viateur bakery in Montreal ($2.50 each) and
sandwiches crammed with smoked meat, the Québécois version of pastrami ($9 for 7  ounces, $17 for 14
ounces). But lately things have been interesting after dark. In October, Mr. Bernamoff and Ms. Cohen
hired Aaron Israel, previously a sous chef at Torrisi Italian Specialties, to expand the dinner
menu. Mr. Israel seems intent on doing for humble home-style Ashkenazi food what the gentlemen at
Torrisi are doing for Italian-American: update and elevate. To that end, there is cholent ($18), a
stew traditionally prepared on a Friday and slow-cooked overnight, to get around the proscription
against lighting a fire and cooking on the Sabbath. It is meant to be eaten at noon, but on an icy
night no one will complain. The buried treasures are a plump sweetbread kishke, or sausage, and a
veal short rib that collapses at the touch. Poulet juif ($16) surprises with an infusion of smoke.
Trout ($16) is dressed simply, with pickled beets and shallots, atop a skim of horseradish cream.
These are comforting dishes, well made. Best is the whole mishpucha ($12 a person), a soup whose
name means family in Yiddish. Served in a Chinese hot pot (perhaps in a nod to the other Jewish
comfort food?), it brims with fluffy matzo balls; delicate chicken-liver kreplach, or dumplings;
mandlen, oyster-cracker-ish croutons; strands of  lo mein; kale; carrots; and a hunk of pounded and
poached chicken breast. But what’s with the salt? The most egregious offenders are the kasha
varnishkes, a muddle of buckwheat, bowtie pasta and chicken gizzards ($8 small, $14 large), and the
poutine, French fries topped with cheese curds and an oppressive gravy ($8 classic, $11 with smoked
meat). I am ordinarily defenseless before French fries, but even I could resist these. A quartino of
the house Côte-du-Rhône ($10) will rectify matters. Or — beyond the purview of this column, alas — a
bottle of Mourvèdre from the Berkeley, Calif.-based winery Donkey and  Goat ($45). The space, a
former garage, is minimally but fastidiously designed: concrete floors, white bentwood coat hangers,
black scissor-arm pharmacy lamps extended from the wall just so. Five vintage Woolworth’s stools
line the counter. Kitchen towels serve as napkins. In lieu of booths, there are three communal
tables, each roomy enough for four strangers or six very close friends, and one tiny two-top
squeezed against the window. No reservations are taken, and waits can be exasperating, although you
may enjoy the birdsong being piped outside as part of the Birds of Brooklyn art project. This is the
delicatessen, circa 2011: beautiful and earnest young people in architect eyeglasses sipping wine
and eating chopped liver on pletzel like a canapé. Is that so wrong? There may be snow piling up
outside, but in here it is warm, and it smells like paradise.   97a Hoyt Street (Atlantic Avenue),
Boerum Hill, Brooklyn, (718) 852-7510,  .  The whole mishpucha, cholent, poulet juif, trout. : $1.50
to $18.  All major cards.  Breakfast  and lunch, Monday to Friday, 8  a.m. to 4  p.m.; dinner,
Wednesday to  Thursday, 5:30 to 10  p.m., Friday to Saturday, 5:30 to 11  p.m.,  Sunday, 5:30 to 10
p.m.; brunch, Saturday and Sunday, 10  a.m. to  4  p.m.  The  tables are on a raised platform that
is not wheelchair accessible, and  the counter is too high for a customer in a wheelchair to dine
comfortably; the bathroom is too narrow for wheelchair access.  Not accepted.
