Saxon & Parole
American
316 Bowery,
212-254-0350
BRAD FARMERIE, the executive chef at the new NoHo restaurant Saxon & Parole, is nothing if not
versatile. When his restaurant Double Crown, a culinary fantasy of British imperialism in Asia,
closed this summer, Mr. Farmerie and his partners, AvroKO Hospitality Group, quickly created an
entirely different mood, aura and menu in the same space, as if they were stagehands changing sets
between acts at the Metropolitan Opera. The artifacts and tchotchkes meant to conjure up colonial
nostalgia have been banished to the prop closet until the next go-round. The British-Asian mashup of
a menu has gone the way of the empire, to live on through the rosy lens of memory until great minds
decide it’s time to haul it back out. In its place the partners have rolled out an entirely
different theme, though still centered on a lighthearted evocation of a sentimental past. Saxon and
Parole were two 19th-century racehorses, you see. So what? So nothing, really. It’s simply a vehicle
for AvroKO to create a vague sort of horsy ambience, part bluegrass men’s club, part Cracker Barrel,
which in fact is warmly appealing. A large bar dominates the front room. Alongside are two sweet,
human-scale dining rooms, with walls of weathered wood and whitewashed brick. Subtly stylish
reminders of the stable abound: a sleek wagon-wheel chandelier here, stacks of horse blankets there,
and of course renderings of the namesake nags on the wall. Downstairs is another room, done in brown
leather, dark wood paneling and a wall of whiskey bottles. AvroKO cleverly consigns the loudspeakers
of the restaurant’s sound system to the bar upstairs, so while they transmit a steady diet of blues,
classic rock and soul into the dining rooms, it’s not intrusive enough to stymie conversation. Mr.
Farmerie’s new menu is as carefully rendered as the design, emphasizing gutsy all-American fare that
does not require the conceptual leaps inherent in Double Crown’s more academic approach. It reads of
richness and abundance. All told, one sits down to dinner at Saxon & Parole anticipating warmth,
good times and satisfaction. Will the expectations be fulfilled? Yes and no. As with so many current
menus, composing a meal requires some complex calculations. Aside from appetizers and main courses,
the menu teems with other choices, like what are described as “seasonal pots of deliciousness.” It’s
a bit of a hype job, in truth. Chicken liver mousse, sweetened with port and pepper jelly, arrives
in a glass crock. But it’s a bit too sweet, and besides, why stick a big sprig of frisée in the
crock, hindering passage of knife to mousse? Other pre-appetizer possibilities include oysters,
shrimp cocktail, towers of raw seafood, or, for those more inclined to turf, plates of charcuterie.
One outlier among these simple presentations: a blend of chopped razor clams, egg, a little caviar
and lemon aioli that is sort of a delicious, clam-intense version of lobster  . Most of these dishes
are unnecessary if you order conventionally, which clearly not everybody does. On one side of the
dining room, young women drink cocktails and eat shellfish, pausing to have a waiter take group
shots with each of their smartphones. Elsewhere, a dating couple share a hamburger and a single
glass of wine, while at a large table a steakhouse-style office gathering is in progress, with beefy
men guffawing, ties tucked between shirt buttons. As appealing as the menu seems, the rendering is
inconsistent. A salad of diced roast beets with watercress, spiced pecans and feta is a superb
composition, a blend of sweet and bitter, soft and crunchy. But another salad of endive, frisée and
spinach with maple-glazed grapes seems ill-defined, dominated by the sweet grapes, which lack a
contrasting flavor. Steamed leaves of brussels sprouts are draped with a poached egg and coated with
a hollandaise flavored with truffle and yuzu, then topped with bits of pancetta, a melding of rich,
comforting goodness. Then comes a carrot, ginger and lemon soup, with the intriguing addition of
“toasted chili marshmallow.” Don’t bother. The marshmallow, which melts into the soup, combines with
the carrot to make this otherwise underseasoned soup overwhelmingly sweet. Between these poles are
decent, satisfying, unremarkable dishes, like a terrine of foie gras with a sweet, tangy peach and
onion relish, and tender mussels in a tomato-and-caper broth. The highlight is an extraordinary
burger that is a veritable explosion of umami. A big patty of aged beef is topped not just with a
thick swatch of bacon and melted havarti, but with a fried egg as well. Does the funky tang come
from the meat or the toppings? Hard to tell, but it’s altogether messy and delicious. One clue might
be that the steaks, both a bone-in strip and a rib-eye for two, lack the same burst of flavor,
though the menu says they have been dry-aged for 28 days. They are tender and beefy enough, but more
satisfying steaks are easy to find. By contrast, a diminutive filet mignon, which in the days of our
thoroughbred heroes might have been called a lady’s steak, was perfectly satisfying. Better choices
include a moist, flavorful roasted half chicken that included both white and dark meat, not always a
given no matter what a menu says, with a lively garnish of charred fennel, olives and sun-dried  . A
Berkshire pork chop was likewise beautifully cooked, pink inside and full of porky flavor, with
apple, quince and a salad of purple potatoes. A lobster, grilled and halved, was rich, buttery and
tinged with lemon (and enticing with a side of pickled tomatillo), but a roasted branzino, stuffed
with Parmesan and panko, was overcooked and tasteless. Service at Saxon & Parole is still a work in
progress, well meaning and friendly but at times clueless. Once, the steak for two was simply set
down with an empty plate, and left to me to divvy up. Things tend to lag, too, and fatigue can
overcome a table as plates are left uncleared long after the eating has ended. That’s unfortunate,
because several superb desserts await, including warm, feathery light cinnamon doughnuts, and
Mother-in-Law’s Christmas pudding, just about the best fruitcake imaginable: moist, not too sweet,
laced with beams of citrus and chocolate flavor. Ice creams spiked with booze are pretty tasty, too.
The ambience at Saxon & Parole is pleasing. The new set is convincing. But a little more attention
to consistency and execution in cooking and service could make the difference between win, place or
show. ★ 316 Bowery (Bleecker Street), NoHo, (212) 254-0350,  . Casual, bustling and pleasantly
clubby.  Music is loud in the bar, but not intrusive in the dining rooms.  Razor clams with aioli,
beet  , steamed brussels sprouts, foie gras terrine, hamburger, filet mignon, roasted half chicken,
grilled Berkshire pork chop, grilled lobster, cinnamon doughuts, Christmas pudding,  .  The global
list is wide ranging but lacks focus and personality.  Shared seafood towers, $20 to $125;
appetizers, $10 to $17; main courses, $17 to $90 (steak for two); desserts, $9 to $12. Monday to
Thursday, 6 to 11 p.m. Friday and Saturday, 6 p.m. to midnight. Sunday, 6 to 10 p.m. Recommended.
American Express, MasterCard and Visa.  Entrance, main dining area and one restroom are accessible.
