Má Pêche
Asian
15 West 56th Street,
212-757-5878
IT is a strange feeling, sitting in Má Pêche on a Friday night, well underneath Midtown in the basement of the Chambers Hotel, Modest Mouse playing at half volume on the stereo system as people drink wine and talk and stab at sticky <dish>pork ribs</dish> with chopsticks. The seats at the restaurant have backs to them. They are comfortable. There is plenty of space.
There is nothing like this at the other restaurants in 
’s four-restaurant Momofuku confederation — of which Má Pêche is the newest, the largest and the first not located in the East Village. There is no extra space in the other Momofuku restaurants at all, no real creature comforts beyond the food and the service. There are just counters, nooks, sharp corners and little chance for intimate conversation, even at Momofuku Ko, which flies the standard of excellence for them all. (There, you just stare at the chefs and wait for the magic.)
As such, Má Pêche is the first Momofuku restaurant truly suitable for dining with those the Internet calls the olds. (Though like some of its forebears, it takes no reservations.) Eating there is a little like visiting your formerly bohemian artist friend, whom you haven’t seen since he signed with Deitch and bought a double loft in TriBeCa.
The restaurant opened slowly over the course of this spring, not serving dinner for months, gaining its footing, figuring itself out. Now there is even a pre-theater menu.
There is an enormous bare-wood communal table in the middle of the dining room, shaped like an X, surrounded by smaller tables along the walls, beneath giant sails of pinkish canvas that stretch up toward a skylight. On one wall, near the entrance to the kitchen, hangs a large painting by the Mexican artist Miguel Calderón, which some may recognize from the Wes Anderson film 

“The Royal Tenenbaums.”

Smooth concrete abounds.
The food is not quite as precise and magical as it often is in the downtown restaurants, but it is recognizably Changish and strong: big flavors tied together with herbs and acids.
Mr. Chang has installed Tien Ho, formerly the boss of the kitchen at Momofuku Ssam Bar, as chef at Má Pêche. Together they have ginned up a menu that nods in the direction of French-Vietnamese cooking, instead of the Korean-American-with-a-side-of-French cooking that first brought them fame. (Má Pêche means Mother Peach, in the Vietnamese-French dialect known as Tay Boi.)
Accordingly, in line with a bistro, you may order from a raw bar — another first for Mr. Chang — offering <dish>oysters</dish> and <dish>clams</dish>, <dish>shrimp</dish> and Alaskan king crab, with a calamansi mayonnaise and a mignonette with a Thai basil bang. There is local fluke tossed with herbs and pickled pineapple, silky and difficult not to bolt. There is a flavorful squid 
 as well, like a Vietnamese green-papaya salad born of the sea, cool and fragrant, chili hot.
It is best to experience all these piled together onto a huge plateau fruits de mer, as if at some imaginary Balthazar in Da Nang.
Keeping in that vein are Burgundy snails, rich and garlicky, in a sticky, satisfying sauce with <dish>pork sausage</dish>, a bass line below a tarragon melody: French food as cooked for French people. Steak frites also make an appearance, the beef run through a 
 machine before getting  a serious sear, crunchy giving way to soft, and a load of excellent, <dish>salty rice fries</dish> — stackable bars of rectangular, <dish>deep-fried rice noodle</dish> — on the side. And two people or more may share Mr. Ho’s giant <dish>roasted pork chop</dish>, basted with butter — a piggish rejoinder to the porterhouse at Peter Luger.
There are also dishes that might have been airlifted from the Ssam Bar: fried cauliflower with mint and fish sauce, for instance; steak tartare enlivened by soy, scallions and yet more mint; a frisée salad with porky croutons and soft, slippery tripe.
These make for a nice dinner, even if the cauliflower is perpetually overdone. With slightly smaller portion sizes, they make for an excellent lunch as well. (Best is a $25 prix fixe of luscious, crunchy-smooth shrimp spring rolls followed by a bowl of finger-thick rice noodles with <dish>spicy Iowa pork</dish>.)
As at Momofuku Noodle Bar, where you can reserve seats for a massive <dish>fried chicken</dish> dinner, and as at the Ssam Bar, where a giant <dish>pork shoulder</dish> can be reserved, there is one large-format dinner available at Má Pêche: Beef Seven Ways, for $85 a person, with a minimum party of six.
Mr. Ho has a marvelous hand with big cuts of meat, and the dinner is probably worth ordering once or twice in your life.
Tongue salad with basil and plum vinaigrette starts the adventure, the plate paired with some seared wagyu with ginger-scallion sauce and radishes. These are followed by a charred and delicious côte de boeuf, with a huge pile of sliced lemon grass sausage cut through with Thai basil on the side. Yet more follows:  a pile of salty oxtails, along with a giant, soft and overwhelming braised shank of beef with crab paste and chilies that appears straight out of 

“The Flintstones”

—  all of it served with lettuce cups, pickles and an array of condiments that will be familiar to anyone who has eaten in a Vietnamese restaurant.
You get a shot of beef consommé at the end, a kind of palate cleanser, and you can, for $48 more, receive a fat round of stinky, ripe Époisses cheese, with plenty of warm baguette.
It is a punishing meal, deeply satisfying and utterly over the top. (In a different economy, finishing it all would get you the dinner free, or at least a commemorative T-shirt.)
No dessert follows it, though, because it is a tick of the restaurant’s that no dessert is served. You may buy a cookie or some soft-serve 
 on your way out, at a branch of Mr. Chang’s Milk Bar, off the lobby.
Service at the restaurant is of an extremely high standard masked by a casual mien, as is the norm in Mr. Chang’s shops. Cory Lane, who runs the service program for all of them, and Colin Alevras, the antic beverage director, who came to the restaurant from DBGB, patrol Má Pêche with grace and good humor, seeing around corners, anticipating needs. (What, you didn’t realize you wanted to drink some coriander-ish Leipziger beer with your steak and sausage?) Their staff members follow their leads.
In the world of the restaurant-obsessed, the general assumption about Má Pêche has been that Mr. Chang was aiming for a place at the highest level of the mainstream — a coat-and-tie restaurant from rock ’n’ roll kids, as ambitious as his other businesses. Instead he has simply opened a very good restaurant for a Midtown business lunch, a celebratory steak dinner or a drink and some snacks after work. He and Mr. Ho may not at this point have any more ambitions beyond that.
It makes the restaurant a success on its own terms, which may not be yours.
★★
15 West 56th Street (Fifth Avenue), Midtown; (212) 757-5878, 
.
Downtown chic in a soaring Midtown space: Momo-middle-aged.
 Conversational against a soundtrack of rock.
 Raw bar, ribs, snails, frisée 
, <dish>rice noodles</dish>, steak frites, pork chop, trout, Beef Seven Ways.
 Great selections under $75, but many wines may be unfamiliar. Talk to the beverage director, Colin Alevras, or the sommelier, Christina Turley.
 Appetizers and small plates, $12 to $18; entrees, $18 to $29; two-course prix-fixe lunch, $25. Beef Seven Ways dinner, $85.
Breakfast, 7 to 11 a.m.; lunch, 11:30 a.m. to 2:30 p.m., except Sunday; dinner, 5 to 11 p.m.
No reservations are accepted, save for Beef Seven Ways, lunch prix fixe, and pre-theater prix fixe.
 All major cards.
 Separate levels are connected by long flights of stairs. Wheelchair access is through the Chambers Hotel and its elevator banks.
 Ratings range from zero to four stars and reflect the reviewer’s reaction to food, ambience and service, with price taken into consideration. Menu listings and prices are subject to change.
