Sariling Atin
Philippine
89-12 Queens Boulevard ,
718-397-1200
Fish are stacked on the glass over the steam table, fried whole without interfering batter, all
crackly veneer and quick-tearing flesh. There are galunggong, like swollen cigars with the flavor of
a shyer mackerel; pompano in puckering silver; and, best of all, <dish>bangus</dish> (pronounced ban-GOOSE), or
milkfish, flaky and sweet, stripped of bones and butterflied flat, but with the brittle fletch of a
tail intact. Below are 15 chafing pans, brimming with stews and noodles. Extra pans have been
balanced on top, along with china plates of banana-ketchup-glazed beef and chicken skewers, which a
glance around the room reveals that everyone has plundered. Sariling Atin, whose name in Tagalog
means “our own,” opened in April in Elmhurst, Queens, on a block once dominated by furniture
showrooms. From the outside, it looks like a small grocery, with a “Send Money” sign and the current
Philippine peso exchange rate posted in the window. Red Christmas globes of Edam cheese, for the
Filipino celebration of Noche Buena, linger up front by the cash register. But past the shelves of
egg cracklets and adobo-flavored corn nuts, Datu Puti cane vinegar and Andok’s Litson sauce, is a
modest dining room. Food is ordered turo-turo (point-point) style, as in a cafeteria, and spooned
into plastic-foam bowls. Rice or <dish>pancit</dish> (noodles) with one side is $4.50; add two more sides and
you’re at $9.50 and already full. Still, you will want both rice and pancit, particularly p<dish>ancit
palabok</dish>, egg noodles blanched and tumbled in a briny gravy, with a crush of chicharrónes. Among the
rotating dishes may be <dish>kalderetang kambing</dish>, goat cooked until it shivers apart, in a meld of
tomatoes, olives, pickles and — an essential of the Filipino kitchen — liver spread, which gives it
a strangely mushroomy undertow. <dish>Seafood kare-kare</dish> is equally rich, with a base of shrimp stock
thickened with peanut butter and tomato sauce and loaded with banana blossoms, long beans and
eggplant. It is served with a dab of <dish>bagoong</dish>, tiny fermented shrimp, and is nothing without it. Much
of the buffet is committed to pork: dominoes of crispy <dish>pork belly</dish>, with gilded bubbles and a snaking
smoke; Bicol Express, a near curry from southern Luzon, with pork steeped in coconut milk, fermented
shrimp paste, ginger and serious chiles; mongo, an extraordinary stew in which pork is subordinate
to humble mung beans, with tendrils of spinach and contours of chile, lime and patis (fish sauce).
<dish>Sisig</dish> is the one disappointment, made with pork belly but no pig face, as is custom, and presented
like a cold salad, tossed with lemon juice, onion and more of that liver spread, so that the
deep-fried nubs of pork lose their crunch. The owners, Celso Concepcion, known as Nilo, and his
wife, Rosario, known as Rose — in the Philippines, nicknames are used more often than official ones
— run another grocery-restaurant in Toms River, N.J. Two decades ago, Rose immigrated to the United
States to work as a nurse’s aide, sending money home to Nilo and their daughter Rocel for years
until they were able to join her. Now 25, Rocel manages the family’s Queens outpost, although she
hopes to go to dentistry school one day. (Nilo’s cousin Edgardo Gonzales oversees the kitchen.) The
dining room, decorated by Rose, is efficient and cheerful. A sunflower made from painted banana
leaves brightens one wall, a mosaic of mirror and capiz shells another. (“My mother loves Pier 1
Imports,” Rocel says with a laugh.) Filipino soap operas flutter and heave on the TV overhead. On a
recent evening, an off-duty doorman hovered by the counter, his jacket with epaulets unbuttoned and
swinging. Every table was full, with knots of women wielding substantial handbags, fathers and
pigtailed daughters and boys in United States Navy caps and Ecko hoodies who were supplementing
dinner with a bag of pork cracklings and Mountain Dew. It is not quite translatable, what it means
in Tagalog to call something “our own.” When the Concepcions opened their first shop eight years
ago, they identified it, obliquely, as an “oriental grocery.” Here the word on the awning is
“Filipino.”
