Mimi’s Hummus
Middle Eastern
245 East 14th Street,
212-951-1105
For six years, the Jerusalem-born chef Mimi Kitani resisted putting falafel on the menu at  , her
namesake restaurant on Cortelyou Road in Ditmas Park, Brooklyn. She wanted people to try other
dishes, drawn from her family’s roots in Morocco and Iraq, and to stop thinking of falafel as the
epitome of Middle Eastern cuisine. But last fall, when she and her boyfriend, Avi Shuker, opened two
outposts of Mimi’s in Manhattan — a stand at the Midtown food hall   and a restaurant in the East
Village — she relented. Both locations offer falafel, although Brooklyn remains bereft. (Her kitchen
there is smaller and not fully equipped.) Here they are, in the new, slightly more expansive dining
room on East 14th Street: impeccable orbs with dark, thin shells that are crisp for an instant and
then disintegrate. The insides are moist without density, nearly half air and herbs. You can ask for
them tucked into a pita or, better, arranged in a neat X over the hummus that made the chef’s name.
I first tasted Ms. Kitani’s hummus in 2009, when   of hummus parlors in New York City. At the time,
I thought it was the best in town. I still do. Asked for her secrets, Ms. Kitani said simply, “You
need good chickpeas.” She soaks them overnight, then cooks them until they fall apart and turn
almost sweet. A pulse with the requisite tahini, garlic and lemon: The recipe is straightforward,
yet somehow the result is more grounded than the over-whipped and lemon-sharp versions often found
elsewhere. The texture is a little thicker, more velvet than silk. There is a satisfying near-bitter
undertone, an unmasked earthiness, with lemon as contour, not dominant note. (Add zhug, a crush of
jalapeños and herbs, if you would like a burn.) But Mimi’s was never just a hummus joint. As at the
Brooklyn original, it’s easy to be distracted by dishes like mujaddara, a mess of black lentils, fat
raisins and bulgur wheat, lapped by sheep’s milk yogurt. This, tradition has it, was the “pottage of
lentils” in Genesis, for which a famished Esau relinquished his birthright. He should have held out
for the pottage that accompanies (and overshadows) a narrow pan-fried fillet of branzino. Here the
lentils are obscured in a verdant overlay of greens and herbs, heady with the musk of Persian dried
limes, which have been boiled in brine and parched by the sun until they half implode. They deliver
as much smoke as sweet-sour tang. The menu at East 14th Street mostly follows its counterpart in
Brooklyn: blackened beef kebabs with a touch of pink at the center; shakshuka, a cinnamon-streaked
tomato stew in a cast-iron skillet, with snowcaps of eggs cracked directly over it; roasted
cauliflower, its sugars just starting to bloom, veiled in tahini and garlic. Chicken shawarma is
approximated without a turning spit, the thigh meat grilled and roughly shredded, bearing a whiff of
Indian curry powder. This is even better anointed with amba, an Iraqi take on mango chutney, the
fruit pickled almost beyond sweetness, flaring hot and sour. Kebabs, shawarma and falafel may all be
configured as sandwiches, so stuffed that they’re hard to eat without getting your nose involved.
The superlatively fluffy pita is imported from Israel. (In Brooklyn, Ms. Kitani has started
fermenting her dough and baking it in a wood oven at  , the Italian restaurant that she and Mr.
Shuker opened in 2013, down the street from Mimi’s. They don’t yet have the capacity to supply it to
their Manhattan locations.) There are proper endings to the meal, too: malabi, a panna-cotta-like
milk pudding scented with rosewater, and punchim, a treat from Ms. Kitani’s childhood, balls of dark
chocolate seamed with shattered tea biscuits. Like its Brooklyn predecessor, the restaurant on East
14th Street has walls clad in perforated wood panels, like a minimalist lattice. Tables, under a
chandelier, are set with jars of flowers. Still, the space, once a dollar pizzeria, seems less cozy
and anchored to the neighborhood than Mimi’s on Cortelyou Road. Turn the lights low, and the mood
could change. For those of us not so fortunate to live in Ditmas, it is a boon to finally have
Mimi’s close by.
