Masha & the Bear
Russian
771 Grand Street,
718-384-5000
In the time of Peter the Great, the czar’s chief of police trained a bear to offer visitors a cup of pepper brandy. Down it, and you were ushered in; fail, and you were mauled (or “hugged,” as one 19th-century account delicately put it).
At 
, which opened in January in East Williamsburg, Brooklyn, there is no such entrance fee or ursine enforcer. But a challenge of sorts awaits on the drinks menu: horseradish vodka, infused in house. According to Vitaly Sherman, who runs the restaurant with his wife, Maria (known as Masha), Peter the Great mandated that all Russian inns keep a stash of horseradish vodka in their cellars for the rejuvenation of weary travelers. If an innkeeper did not comply, “he was executed,” Mr. Sherman said.
I could find no verification of this penalty in published histories. But the mind-swiping shock of the horseradish vodka — a simultaneous kick in the chest and the head, the vodka kindling and widening the heart, the horseradish fizzing up behind the eyes and then prickling down the brain stem — convinced me of its restorative powers.
Mr. Sherman, a native of Belarus who came to the United States in 1989, is an effusive ambassador for the cuisine and culture of his youth. The restaurant’s name comes from a folk tale about a little girl lost in the woods who outwits a bear and bends him to her will; 
 inspired by the tale sometimes plays on the flat-screen TV above the bar.
The chef, Anya Vasilenko from Ukraine, cleaves to tradition. Ukha, a soup purportedly beloved by Ivan the Terrible, is clear and deep, its broth a memory of <dish>salmon</dish>, sturgeon and branzino, brightened with dill and lemon. Blintzes are near-weightless kerchiefs of dough, to be folded around sour cream and red caviar. Roughly patted pelmeni come crammed with <dish>chicken</dish> or <dish>beef</dish> and pork in the Siberian style, attended by sweated onions and more sour cream.
Olivier salad was invented in Moscow in the mid-19th century by a Belgian or French chef (accounts disagree). Originally an extravagant assemblage of grouse, caviar, lobster and veal tongue, it was rehabilitated under Stalin with plain chicken and potatoes, although the mayonnaise, and a touch of decadence, remain.
Herring in a Fur Coat could be the title of a Soviet absurdist fable about a proletarian Cinderella who rejects the czarevitch and runs off with the rat turned coachman. Instead, it is a salad born of the Russian Revolution, with diced herring (staple of the working man) and potatoes (birthright of the peasantry) united under a mantle of beets in Bolshevik red. As served here, it has an almost bourgeois air, presented in what looks like a footed candy dish, with a plume of parsley. On a recent evening, the herring was buried deep and close to undetectable, and the beets were as sweet as shattered macarons.
The restaurant suggests a tavern with its dark, shiny wood-paneled walls and intermittent décor: here a row of Soviet propaganda posters, tucked just below the ceiling, there a medieval painting of St. George and the dragon. Vodka is stored in pressurized kegs to keep it pristine, avoiding constant exposure to air from opening bottles. That attention to detail doesn’t extend to the service, which is genial and unpredictable; at times, I wished that the dishes I had ordered had tracking numbers. Some never arrived.
What did land on the table was unfussy and satisfying: lamb shank, the bone disrobing at the graze of a fork; Cornish hen roasted in a tapa, a kind of cast-iron skillet with a lid wielded like a brick to flatten the meat and imprison the juices. The standout was beef stroganoff, a debauch of heavy cream.
“Have you heard of Count Stroganoff?” Mr. Sherman asked. One last story: The count, riding to his dacha for a hunting party, realized that there were almost no ingredients on hand with which to prepare a feast.
“He said to his servant, ‘You’re going to create something to impress my friends,’ ” Mr. Sherman said, beaming. “ ‘Or I’ll kill you.’ ”
