Jams
American
1414 Avenue of the Americas,
212-703-2007
By the early 1980s, New Yorkers knew that something major was happening in the kitchens of
California. They had heard about the revolution, but most of them hadn’t tasted it until Jonathan
Waxman opened Jams in 1984. Here was a report from the West Coast front lines brought by a chef
fresh from Michael’s in Santa Monica and, before that, Chez Panisse in Berkeley. To put it in terms
readers born after 1980 will understand, this was a bit like being the first person in town to have
cooked at both   and  , but bigger. Styles in food didn’t get around as fast in those days. Jams had
an open kitchen. Mesquite flared under the grill. Vegetables, in their prime, were barely cooked.
Salsa, citrus and cilantro breezed in. Low-fat sauces sat beneath the meat and fish, not smothering
them on top. Small portions (critics called them “stingy” and “skimpy”) were ringed by arctic
expanses of white china. Mr. Waxman brought a loose, unbuttoned American spirit to nouvelle cuisine,
still nouvelle at the time, and the city loved it. Andy Warhol went to the Upper East Side to eat at
Jams once or twice a week, Factory apparatchiks in tow. Then came overexpansion and the 1987 stock
market crash. As the decade ended, one of its most influential restaurants went down with it. I
can’t blame Mr. Waxman for dreaming he would bring Jams back from the grave one day. But after a few
meals at the   that returned to Manhattan in August, I also can’t help wishing it had stayed there.
This zombie Jams, at the corner of 58th Street and Avenue of the Americas, inside the 1 Hotel
Central Park, trudges ahead steadily, but it’s stiff in the joints and short on joie de vivre. Some
writers have seen the return of Jams as a sign that ’80s cuisine is coming back. But anyone who
shows up with a   expecting to see customers exclaiming over kiwis and Jay McInerney doing lines of
Bolivian marching powder in the men’s room will be disappointed. The first sign that this revival
will not set any new paradigms is the design of the dining room, which looks like a reclaimed
factory. You’ve been in this room before, downtown or in Williamsburg. White pipes and ducts creep
along a soaring ceiling, and the walls are scraped down to the bricks and structural terra cotta.
The wood tables are bare, the chairs midcentury in style. There are some flashbacks to the original,
like visible flames in the open kitchen, and a handful of items branded as Jams classics on the
menu. The Jams chicken, half a bird grilled over wood, is charred on the skin and juicy inside,
dressed with a little tarragon butter. It won’t eclipse the roast chicken with a crackling skin that
has made Mr. Waxman’s downtown restaurant,  , a landmark, but it could be the centerpiece of a fine
relaxed dinner if you are in the neighborhood. Mr. Waxman does not lay the pieces of bird in a nest
of skinny, golden fries the way he did in the ’80s, which is just as well because the Jams fries are
soggy with oil and can be limp, too. They arrive with the Jams burger, a juiceless, saltless,
flavorless flap of overcooked meat that could have come from the most influential Greek diner of the
’80s. It would have been a complete loss without the help of bacon, cheese and aioli. The Jams
pancakes, pink with sweet red peppers, were starting to curl at the edges when they appeared and
weren’t quite tender. They weren’t cooked four decades ago, but apparently they weren’t cooked four
minutes ago, either. There were three, each topped with a twirl of bagel-shop-grade smoked salmon
and just enough caviar to cover my thumbnail in a single layer. Only the summery creamed corn with
flecks of red pepper spread out under the pancakes had any real flavor. A restaurant that trips over
its signature dishes is as hard to trust as a person who misspells his own name. (Good thing there
are only four letters in Jams.) The chicken aside, I tended to have better luck when I treated the
Jams name as a warning label and ordered things without it. Toasted fregola sarda under a big heap
of plump mussels in a tomato broth warmly spiced with chorizo, for instance. Or the seared gnocchi
with lots of corn, a little lobster and some cherry tomatoes. Or the hunk of swordfish, gently
cooked so the interior still had a tinge of pink, with a smooth and mild romesco. Desserts can be
likably retro, such as the simple and very fresh apple turnover made with puff pastry, or the more
complicated charlotte with toasted ladyfingers forming a soft fence around a filling of moist,
fruity fig jam. Recently the menu promised a “German chocolate angel food cake”; while it was
nowhere near as angelically light as the name implied, it still had its appeal. But the non-branded
items can also be tricky. Rigatoni with crab in a spicy sauce was fine up to a point, that point
being the rigatoni itself. Some tubes were floppily overcooked, others leathery and half-raw at the
ends. The ingredients, which do a lot of the work at Barbuto, sometimes seem unwilling to lend a
hand at Jams. The cooked fresh tuna tossed with aioli and piled on a bun (a sandwich sold,
misleadingly, as pan bagnat) had almost no presence. A raw fluke appetizer with cubes of flavorless,
brown-spotted avocado tasted like nothing except salt. Servers do their best to cope with delays
between courses that can stretch up to 20 minutes even when the dining room isn’t full. They seem
well trained, delivering smart wine recommendations with confidence. But some of the lines they’ve
been given are odd. Mine volunteered the information that the aioli on the burger “is a garlic
mayonnaise.” For a minute, it really did seem like 1984 again.
