2nd City
Philippine
525 Hudson Street,
917-639-3262
Filipino food was once an underdog among Asian cuisines. Five years ago, it was little known in New
York City outside ethnic enclaves like Little Manila in Woodside, Queens, and a cluster of groceries
and restaurants along First Avenue in the East Village that catered to families of Filipino nurses.
There had been early outliers like Cendrillon in SoHo, which started out pan-Asian in 1995 and
gradually shifted to a more Filipino menu, and   on the Lower East Side, which has mingled Filipino
dishes with Thai since 2004. Then   opened in 2011 — on First Avenue, yes, but with an irreverent
attitude, serious cocktails and no shirking from pig ears, chicken feet or bagoong (fermented baby
shrimp). These days, you can find Filipino flavors at restaurants that don’t identify themselves as
wholly Filipino, like   and  . But there are also self-proclaimed Filipino restaurants whose
deracinated food may seem puzzling to those raised on crispy pata (deep-fried pork leg) and balut
(duck embryo). The near-simultaneous opening this year of two “Filipino taquerias” suggests a
tipping point. Filipino has become a culinary label recognizable to and valued by non-Filipinos, so
much so that it can be applied, as an enticement, to food with only the faintest resemblance to its
origins. It is the chop-suey moment. Filipino food has arrived. First to open was 2nd City, in May
in the West Village. The chef,  , named it after Cebu City, the first capital of the Philippines,
where his mother, a model, actress ( ) and  , grew up. He learned to cook from his father, a chef in
Toronto with roots in Batangas, south of Manila, who had his son peeling and beheading shrimp in
commercial kitchens from the age of 9. To begin, there are chips made from lumpia wrappers, quick to
shatter, with ossified bubbles. These are best dunked in a salsa called 2nd Base (1st and 3rd are
also available), which is not salsa at all, but suka, the recipe courtesy of Mr. Andino’s
grandmother: Datu Puti cane vinegar muddled with onion, garlic, serrano chile, sugar and calamansi.
This is strong and good. But a side dish of pancit bihon came with the rice vermicelli clipped short
and sodden. And the flavors of chicken adobo were overpowered by kimchi rice in the tight swaddle of
a burrito. Some of the better offerings are more allusive, like fried-chicken sliders with Japanese
katsu sauce, transfigured by a bright streak of calamansi. Tacos — one of barracuda poached in
clarified butter, another of slow-braised short rib — are anointed with sinigang, a tangy tamarind
soup, and turned prickly with perforated curls of chicharrones. Mr. Andino calls his cuisine
“AmAsian,” short for American-Asian, giving himself wider scope. The restaurant, equipped with one
exceedingly narrow table and bar stools, feels like an extension of Mr. Andino’s personality. “Hours
of Awesomeness” are posted in the window. The staff wears aloha shirts. A fever dream of a mural,
painted by his mother and her brother, juxtaposes a jeepney, a pink carabao and “I eat rice,” Mr.
Andino’s onetime AOL screen name. Menu items are written on skateboards, the chef’s main mode of
transportation. The website includes a shot of him jumping naked into a pool. He said he hopes to
turn 2nd City into a mini-chain, with Bushwick, Brooklyn, as the next stop. , which opened in June
in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, unites Filipino and Tex-Mex, the heritages of the owners, Dennis
Mendoza, born in Quezon City, and Autumn Stanford, from Austin, Tex. (The couple also run  ,
specializing in Czech-Tex pastries, which is around the corner.) Mr. Mendoza initially consulted his
mother and his aunt, but found he had to make significant changes to their recipes. “We eat
everything with rice,” he said. “The flavors were too intense without it.” Best among the brief
menu’s tacos is one with skirt steak pliant from a daylong marinade, brought just shy of burning in
a pan. Mr. Mendoza wanted it to taste as if it came from a street cart in the Philippines, and it
does. But chicken adobo was watered down so much, I couldn’t tell what culture it came from. Spam,
dipped in egg wash, breaded and deep-fried, is mostly comic relief. Better is the simplicity of
tilapia, pan-seared so it still tastes like itself. The Tex-Mex side of the menu is more distinct.
Flour tortillas, made daily by hand, are elastic and chewy. Some tacos are liberally strewn with
French’s crispy fried onions. And Ms. Stanford’s queso sauce, fervent with cumin and Hatch green
chiles, manages to sustain a state of melt, although you should still eat it as quickly as possible.
Mr. Mendoza layers nachos with queso and sisig, traditionally a hash of pig head but here made with
more approachable pork butt. The meat is patted down with a proprietary rub (Mr. Mendoza alone knows
the formula), smoked for hours, then minced with onion, ginger and jalapeños and doused with soy and
lime. The taste is pure smoke and heady, but I couldn’t detect the sting of citrus, and I missed the
crunchy, caramelized nubs from the customary hot-skillet finish. Swell Dive is perhaps best
appreciated as a bar, with food designed to abet drinking. Small booths are backed by wooden
peaked-roof frames in weathered tropical colors, with pictures of beach scenes like views from
windows. (Mr. Mendoza, an architect, was thinking of cabanas.) Footage of big-wave surfing is
projected on a wall. Diners can borrow Jenga or Scrabble to play in the backyard, partly covered by
an old sail. Like Mr. Andino, Mr. Mendoza never intended to make strictly Filipino food. “I didn’t
want people to compare it to what they grew up with,” he said. “I could never compete.”
