Dirt Candy
American, Vegetarian
430 East Ninth Street,
212-228-7732
DID you hear the one about the rutabaga? No, probably not. Vegetables don’t tend to inspire great
jokes. On the contrary, they conjure their very own brand of humorlessness, the tight-lipped
officiousness of grim nutritionists that is captured in the phrase “Eat your vegetables.” Since
opening Dirt Candy in the East Village almost four years ago, the chef   has been waging war on the
“eat your vegetables” mind-set, using humor as one of her weapons. Here she is on her restaurant’s
Web site on the subject of cabbage: “It’s the wino of the vegetable world: smelly, unloved and
looking at it makes you feel sad. A cabbage salad sounds even worse. Cabbage that’s ... raw? It
sounds like a plated suicide note.” Humor is so integral to Ms. Cohen’s work that she may be the
only chef in America who could publish her first   in comic-book form and make the decision seem not
just sensible but inevitable. Drawn by Ryan Dunlavey with facial expressions that range from mild
exasperation to howling rage, Ms. Cohen’s cartoon character delivers bitingly funny monologues about
appearing on “Iron Chef” and rolling out pasta dough. Along the way, she and her staff beat the
daylights out of a wizard and a fairy who are idiotic enough to suggest that pickles are made by
magic. But Ms. Cohen’s chief weapon in the battle against vegetable scolds is the food she serves at
Dirt Candy, a vegetarian restaurant that is thrillingly free of high-minded ideals. Ms. Cohen isn’t
necessarily out to save a small planet or prevent heart disease. Her goals are possibly more
subversive, and she achieves them with vegetable cookery that is original, clever, visually
arresting and, above all, a lot of fun to eat. Take the dish called   The punctuation is the
restaurant’s, but I’ll go along with the emotion. Ms. Cohen gives cauliflower florets a long bath in
maple smoke, dips them in cornflakes, fries them to a golden crisp and serves them on waffles. She’s
making a visual pun on the chicken-leg shape of the florets and stems. But these smoky and crunchy
nuggets also invite you to see vegetables as an indulgence, a pleasure that is not quite guilty but
not entirely innocent, either. Eating at Dirt Candy can be like going to a child’s birthday party in
a country where all the children love vegetables.  , with layers of rosemary lady fingers
sandwiching a sweet mascarpone whipped with grilled eggplant, sounds like a dare: daring you to try
it, daring you to like it. While you consider your options, a server brings the final element of the
dish, a white frizz of cotton candy with a startlingly pure and piney taste of rosemary. It lifts up
the eggplant, the dessert and the party. One way of cooking vegetables is to go deep, to concentrate
flavors until you have the world’s most carroty carrot, and leave it at that. Ms. Cohen builds
layers of flavor from the outside in. During the fall, she constructs a   using tomatoes in every
way imaginable, to intensify the effect. There are dried tomatoes in a pink, biscuit-like crust;
there are peeled and marinated cherry tomatoes on top of that crust, with a creamy layer of smoked
feta; there is a ribbon of sweet and chewy tomato leather around the tart; finally, off to the side,
there is a salad of fresh and dehydrated cherry tomatoes. The whole was more than the sum of its
parts, but all the parts were good to begin with. The same isn’t true yet of a new dish (Onions!)
built around small Chinese-derived cakes of smoked scallions and chives. One night they were
overwhelmingly smoky; on another night the smoke was more reticent but the cakes themselves tasted
flat. Both nights, a salad of grilled scallions, red onions and herbs could have used a livelier,
more decisive dressing. But it’s very difficult to criticize a dish that includes the world’s
tiniest onion rings, each just big enough to fit on the tip of a chopstick. These elaborate plates,
each of which holds about a half-dozen components and can be made in vegan form upon request, emerge
from a visibly cramped kitchen. This may seem like a marvel, but it pales next to the logistical
feat Ms. Cohen and her staff pulled off early this month. Like hundreds of restaurants downtown,
Dirt Candy lost power for four days after  . Every perishable, including stocks, jams and pickles,
had to be tossed onto the sidewalk in trash bags. Almost all of it was replenished in just two days,
which meant scheduling times and temperatures for the single oven down to the minute. It must have
been like re-enacting the invasion of Normandy in a kiddie pool. It also involved the same kind of
spatial planning that allows Dirt Candy to fit 18 seats into a spare, modernist dining room where
even one more might be too much. Wineglasses are stored on a sea-green glass ledge above the tables,
and customers waiting for a table are stored outside on Ninth Street. Vegetarian cooks in the United
States have not always found much nourishment in American cuisine. Some looked to health food and
ideology, while others have looked abroad. Ms. Cohen dabbles in overseas influences.  !, a lonesome
hobo no more, is reimagined as the star of a marvelous Asian noodle salad, with kohlrabi threads
standing in for noodles, fried walnuts carrying a spicy blast of Sichuan peppercorn, and purple
fried won tons getting their color and flavor from juiced cabbage. A new item on the menu, Beans!,
surrounds haricots verts and crisp tofu with a deeply intriguing sauce in which saffron, ginger,
cilantro, coriander seed, cumin and Urfa biber pepper offer echoes of Morocco. But there is no
mistaking a Dirt Candy dish for one that you would find in another country. Ms. Cohen is not
adapting the vegetarian cuisine of some other culture. She is inventing her own.
