Neta
Japanese, Sushi
61 West Eighth Street,
212-505-2610
EVEN by the spartan standards of sushi bars, the interior of Neta, on West Eighth Street, is
defiantly plain. The walls are covered in a nubby material that makes them look like bulletin boards
in a corporate cafeteria. They’re even dotted with pushpin-size holes, as if somebody had taken down
the Man With a Van fliers just before unlocking the doors at 5 p.m. The best view in the house is
from one of the 20 seats at the long maple counter, and even then you face a kitchen in
floor-to-ceiling stainless steel where eight or so cooks in white caps silently go about their
business. There are diners on Route 4 in New Jersey that give you more to look at. Soon it won’t
matter. In the presence of unusually well-made sushi, a kind of tunnel vision sets in. Anything else
in the room might as well be invisible as the world narrows down to a gleam of fish on a finger of
rice in a tight circle of light. Since sushi good enough to bring on this malady can cost serious
money, most of us do not suffer from it very often. It’s been my good fortune to have been afflicted
several times recently at Neta. You won’t notice the walls when you have before you a piece of sea
urchin roe on a cylinder of rice wrapped in nori. The tail end of the nori isn’t rolled tight but
instead juts out like the short length of film that you used to feed into cameras. It unwraps itself
inside your mouth. You have just enough time to notice how each grain of rice stands out from the
rest, to enjoy how boldly the rice has been seasoned with vinegar and salt, before the mouth-filling
taste of the sea urchin takes over. Now here in front of you is toro in a milky shade of pink. It
will melt on your tongue; it is nearly melting already, sprawled across its bed of rice. Here is
some marvelous sashimi of orange clam, expertly sliced for maximum tenderness. And now a piece of
hamachi under a frizz of spiced and fried potato threads. Neta is a collaboration of two longtime
disciples of the sushi master Masa Takayama. Nick Kim helped Mr. Takayama open Masa in 2004, and
stayed on as head chef until 2010. His partner, Jimmy Lau, was head chef at Bar Masa in New York and
the one in Las Vegas. In other words, these two know how to order prized Japanese species from
Tsukiji market in Tokyo. Such exotic items are rarely seen at Neta. In part, this reflects the
chefs’ interest in what Mr. Kim has called “Japanese food with local ingredients,” like stunning
scallops from Massachusetts and mugwort foraged in Central Park. Yet their locavore sect allows
salmon from Scotland and bluefin tuna from Spain. In an interview, Mr. Kim gave another reason the
menu is fairly conservative: they weren’t sure yet how far their customers would go. At the moment,
they keep off-the-menu esoterica like blowfish for regulars who want to go beyond the entry-level
offerings. Neta will be an even more exciting and confident restaurant when the chefs have learned
to trust their customers. In the meantime, it has compensatory pleasures. One of the biggest (and
stop that laughing) is vegetable sushi. Had a friend with a fish allergy not told me that she’d
eaten an extremely satisfying vegetarian dinner at Neta, I might have read that section of the menu
with as much attention as I give to sponsored posts on Twitter. Curious, I tried grilled shiitake
caps pressed around rice, a lotus root roll with minty shiso and another roll of asparagus tempura.
They were some of the purest vegetable preparations I’ve tasted all spring. If your heart does not
dance to the rhythms of mushroom sushi, then by all means proceed directly to the small hot and cold
dishes. Grilled sea scallop is sent out on its shell with butter seasoned with garlic and soy as its
sauce, dots of sea urchin as condiment and a lime wedge as garnish. The recipe would be wonderful
with any good scallop. The chefs at Neta use one that has been severed from its shell an instant
before grilling, a level of freshness that will keep this dish in my mind for a very long time.
Fluke and shrimp rolled up inside a translucent sheet of daikon, another small dish, looked
alluring, but was wrapped so tightly its flavors never emerged. This, though, was an anomaly in a
kitchen with such a gentle touch that the food often seems to be held together by nothing more than
the chef’s will. Chopped salmon with Sichuan peppercorn oil is set on a plank of rice so delicate
it’s ready to take flight, and curls of shaved bonito on top flutter like wings trying to help it
achieve liftoff. Duck skin, duck meat and foie gras brushed with hoisin sauce were stowed inside a
half-pipe of cucumber carved so thin it resembled a single layer of leek. This is one of the ideas
the chefs packed with their sushi knives when they left Masa, where a similar cucumber dugout is
used for eel. Another Masa touch is the cocktail glass filled with toro tartare and caviar. You
spread the tuna belly and the sturgeon roe on lightly grilled white bread, a bite at a time. It is
alarmingly easy to eat, the only difficulty being the need to make sure you run out of bread early
so you can eat the last bites of toro and caviar straight off the spoon. This transporting dish is
typically included in Neta’s $135 omakase menu, but not on the $95 version. On its own, it is $48,
the costliest item on the menu by far. Even if you forgo that particular frill, a meal at Neta can
still tear a small hole in your pocket. Of course, you can tell yourself that you just saved
hundreds of dollars by not eating at Masa. Neta is more American than Masa, and the chefs aren’t
above hybrid concoctions like a spicy tuna roll. (It’s good, too.) I did miss the more Japanese
communication style of traditional sushi bars, where an entire meal can be conducted with nods,
smiles and lifted eyebrows. Service at Neta can lean a bit too far in the
how-are-you-enjoying-the-mackerel-tataki direction. But I can’t complain about that, because the
answer was always the same, whether the question concerned the mackerel or almost anything else:
very much, thank you. I enjoyed it very much.
