Nabaya
African
860 Melrose Avenue,
718-401-2283
Although the restaurant is open, the blinds are barely turned, the gold-seamed curtains drawn. It’s
been like this since 2008, when Aissata Kaba, a native of Guinea, took over this corner storefront
across from an overgrown lot in the South Bronx that is still waiting for the city to make it a
park. But now the windows are framed in winking neon ellipses. The dusty burgundy awning has given
way to three-dimensional letters glowing over bands of flame. The restaurant, once called Baté,
after the region in Upper Guinea where Ms. Kaba grew up, has been reborn as Nabaya, loosely
translated on the menu as “where everyone is welcome.” (Both names appear on the sign outside.)
According to Emily Lynn Osborn, an associate professor of African history at the University of
Chicago, nabaya was a policy established in Baté in the 18th century to draw settlers with the
promise of land and arranged marriages. Here the enticements are photographs of food, posted in the
windows and bearing only a faint resemblance (ignore the eerily symmetrical cheeseburger) to what is
found within. For years, Ms. Kaba cooked breakfast at   in Harlem and catered from her home, often
cooking for the local mosque. Her menu here is best understood as a wish list; on my visits, only a
few dishes were ever available. By day, there may be a <dish>Guinean stew of sweet potato
leaves</dish>, nutrient-dense and mellow, more buttery than biting and, once cooked down in a rich
bath of palm oil, akin to spinach minus the bitter aftermath. The brine comes from smoked fish and
crawfish powder, the fervor from Scotch bonnets. And the lusciousness: that’s cow’s foot, hidden in
the depths, swiftly approaching jelly. From Ivory Coast, where Ms. Kaba’s mother and one of her
fellow cooks were born, comes sauce claire, which is heavier than its name suggests, made of fresh
tomatoes collapsed into a dark near-soup. Traditionally, it is thickened with small round African
eggplants, but Ms. Kaba follows a different recipe, relying on garlic, onions and the slow drift of
time. I had it once with long trunks of carrots and a broken fish still threaded with bones, and
later with a half-submerged archipelago of beef, whose leaching fat made the broth thicker and
stronger. Larger, more single-minded plates of meat are saved for dinner. All are excellent:
<dish>lamb shank</dish> ready to shear off the bone; guinea hen with skin just shy of wholly
blackened, needled with Scotch bonnets; a whole <dish>tilapia mobbed with ginger</dish>;
<dish>chicken slapped with spices</dish> until it turns the color of sunset. Never mind the
repetition in sauces, with both lamb and guinea hen anointed in onions alchemized with mustard, a
version of yassa from Senegal (home to another of Ms. Kaba’s cooks). Be warned: The secret
ingredient in almost every dish is Maggi chicken bouillon powder. (This is used in West Africa, too,
as a substitute for more difficult-to-find ingredients like fermented locust-bean seeds.) Maggi also
shows up unmasked at the corner of a heap of attiéké, cassava that has been fermented, grated and
steamed. It looks like couscous and has almost no taste at all, which may explain the presence of
Maggi, along with a handful of minced chile that I realized, belatedly, was raw Scotch bonnet. Less
traumatic condiments include a sauce simply called “pepper,” a small eruption of Scotch bonnets
tempered with palm oil, smoked fish and crawfish powder. But only the staunchly bland sides —
daunting mounds of rice, couscous and truncated strands of vermicelli — need adjusting. From Yankee
Stadium, Nabaya is a 15-minute walk, a straight run down hustling 161st Street. A century ago this
was a German neighborhood; the two-story building where Nabaya stands once housed ladies’ tailors.
Ms. Kaba arrived in 1991, part of the first wave of West African immigrants, many of whom settled in
Morrisania, a few blocks north. While the facade has been rechristened in neon, the dining room
remains drowsy, with a few booths and tables clad in gold brocade under plastic covers. The
television may be tuned to Nigerian rap videos or Fox News, depending on the hour and the state of
mind of the presiding waitress. She may be as baffled by the menu as you are, with its promise of
bagels (there are none) and, for $5, “extras.” “Oh, extras,” she finally said. “That’s extra of
anything.”
