Paet Rio
Thai
81-10 Broadway,
917-832-6672
For years, Phimploy Likitsansook kept her best dishes secret. In 1996, she opened Wondee Siam, a
small, blindingly lit Thai restaurant in Hell’s Kitchen. It proved so popular, she opened a branch a
block away, then three more. (She now runs only the original two.) The food advertised on the menu
seemed to be cooked with Americans in mind, lenient with the chiles and tranquilizingly sweet. But
for certain guests, Ms. Likitsansook would pull out another menu, written only in Thai, containing
specialties rarely found in Manhattan then or now. This was intended not to deprive non-Thai
speakers so much as to protect them from the cuisine’s often scorching splendor. (Like a god
cloaking his glory before mortals.) Eventually, word got out, and the menu was printed in English
and distributed to all diners, titled “Secret Thai Menu,” with a wink. There is no such coyness at
, which Ms. Likitsansook opened in August in Elmhurst, Queens. Like Hell’s Kitchen, the neighborhood
is filled with Thai restaurants, but expectations are higher — more than half the city’s Thai
population lives in the borough, with the largest concentration in the blocks surrounding Paet Rio.
Ms. Likitsansook seems invigorated by the challenge. She has brought a few of her Wondee secrets,
but the execution is more focused, the contours of flavor more distinct: catfish crumbled and
crisped into a fluffy lace; gooey cakes of garlic chives held together by glutinous rice flour, with
a bit of crackle for armor; <dish>watercress tumbled with nubs of crispy por</dish>k, a dish whose greatness is
inextricable from how close it comes to being too salty to eat at all. Best is <dish>miang kha-na</dish>, which
translates roughly as “many tastes in one bite,” a fair description of Thai cooking as a whole. It
arrives with fanned-out Chinese broccoli leaves, vessels for a pileup of jerky-like pork strands,
split peanuts, bird’s-eye chiles with timed triggers, shallots, garlic, ginger and — most vividly —
tiny corners of lime with the peel still on, bitter and bright. Among the newer offerings is <dish>khua
kling</dish>, a southern dry curry of rough-cut pork belly, with no coconut milk to temper the prodigious
chiles that keep going off, trying to one-up themselves. <dish>Khao soi</dish>, from the north, is somewhere
between soup and curry, the broth mellow but profound, haunted by smoky black cardamom, with curls
of fried noodles on top and soft, springy noodles below. There’s no showboating from the chiles
here, and just enough coconut milk to amplify the flavors without weighing down the broth. At Wondee
Siam, the “secret” menu serves as a sort of edited guide, pointing to the chef’s strengths. Here the
menu sprawls, and almost everything falls under “House’s Special.” On my visits, only a few dishes
went unfinished: <dish>squid in a watery sauce</dish> close to minestrone; pale steamed pork so subtle it was
almost without flavor, atop cabbage of shell-shocking heat. (It should have been the other way
around.)
