Mighty Quinn's Barbeque
Barbecue
103 Second Avenue ,
212-677-3733
Chase the scent of great barbecue in New York City, and you are rooting for a team that will, sooner
or later, let you down. You are a Red Sox fan in any season from 1919 to 2003. There will be enough
victories to keep the dream flickering, and there will be nights when you watch the ball hop between
the first baseman’s legs. But every loss feeds a new hope in your heart. This winter, hope came in
threes. Barbecue hounds ran to Gowanus to get burnt ends and char siu pork steak at  , and to
Williamsburg to find out whether   deserved to be crowned the Brisket King of New York in a recent
cook-off. They descended on the East Village to take apart Flintstonian beef ribs at Mighty Quinn’s
Barbeque and watch men in heavy black gloves grab pork shoulder by the fistful and shake it into
dripping hunks — yes, real pulled pork on Second Avenue. All three places slow-cook their barbecue
with hardwood only, no gas allowed. All three places serve meat that is largely raised on pastures
or outdoors, including pork from old breeds with flavorful rosy flesh and a thick girdle of white
fat that bastes the meat as it melts. All are worth noticing, and one of them, Mighty Quinn’s, comes
as close to delivering on all fronts as any barbecue place the city has seen so far. Mighty Quinn’s
got its start as a stall at  , the open-air souk for start-up deliciousness on the Brooklyn
waterfront. Hugh Mangum, a drummer and cook who worked under Jean-Georges Vongerichten, drove there
on weekends hauling brisket he had smoked in Hunterdon County, N.J. The meat was deliberately,
slowly sliced, and the lines were notoriously long. A 30-minute wait could make a stale bagel taste
good, so the greater efficiency of Mighty Quinn’s operation makes it easier to evaluate Mr. Mangum’s
work. The restaurant, which opened in December, runs on the cafeteria model, with meat at the start
of the assembly line, drinks at the end and shiny metal trays that you ferry to a table made of
century-old spruce salvaged from the Puck Building. The counter workers are quick and usually
friendly, although once when I asked for three-quarters of a pound of brisket I got an unsmiling,
have-it-our-way reply: “You can get a pound or a half-pound.” With digital scales in use, why? Half
a pound at a time, it became clear that Mr. Mangum’s scope has widened well beyond brisket. The only
disappointment is the chicken, no better or worse than what a skilled weekend cook can produce with
a kettle grill. And while there is nothing wrong with a <dish>smoked hot sausage</dish>, the one here isn’t quite
strong enough to build a meal around. With its cuts of pork and beef, though, Mighty Quinn’s gets
serious, smoking more cuts of meat more skillfully than its rivals, except, perhaps,  , which
unfortunately obscures its handiwork in sticky sauces. The <dish>pulled pork</dish> is the only one in town that
doesn’t make you embarrassed for New York. It is staggeringly good. The inside meat is slick with
the flavor of old-school pork butt; the black, chewy outer rind looks as if it fell into the fire.
Don’t be fooled, though; the flavor of smoke and sweet fat is most concentrated there. The carvers
splash the pulled pork with the house barbecue sauce, which balances sugar with vinegar and mustard;
Mr. Mangum calls it Texalina because it blends the styles of Texas and North Carolina. It comes
close to being an all-purpose condiment, but the rich butt would still benefit from a more bracingly
acidic treatment. <dish>Spare ribs</dish> are exceptional, too, meaty and juicy, with a smoky outer ring the
color of cherry soda. They are brushed with a little paprika to enhance the oak, cherry and apple
smoke they picked up over many hours in a pit made in Mesquite, Tex. The beef rib is an instant
conversation stopper, a long block of impressively tender meat clinging to a Jurassic curve of bone.
It surely upstages the brisket in theatricality, and possibly in flavor as well, though it’s a close
call. The brisket is cooked patiently to render much of the fat from the top cap, moistening even
the leaner lower muscle until it gleams. A simple rub of salt and pepper is subdued but effective.
The meat is not as thoroughly suffused with smoke as the best products of Texas, but it has as much
finesse as anything I have ever eaten from a cardboard box. The carvers sprinkle the barbecue at
Mighty Quinn’s with Maldon salt. This is nice, but it would be even nicer if the restaurant put salt
and pepper, or better still a salt-pepper blend, on the table, alongside the brown-glass bottles of
that sauce. In some barbecue joints in the South, the awfulness of the side dishes is a point of
pride. New York, still struggling to be taken seriously, tries harder.<dish> Mighty Quinn’s baked beans</dish>,
darkened with molasses, roughed up with mustard and choked with bacon, may be the best I’ve tasted.
If your timing is lucky, you will place your order just as a carver is sweeping a handful of fresh
brisket trimmings from the butcher block into the pan. There is a <dish>salad of peas and edamame</dish> coated
with goat cheese that people seem to like, although it’s a little out of place here. Perfectly at
home, though, is the <dish>sweet potato casserole</dish>, which is like a pie without a crust. Actually, with its
topping of pecans in brown sugar, it is more like two pies, and is as close as Mighty Quinn’s comes
to serving dessert. The natural enemy of well-smoked barbecue in New York is, of course, New
Yorkers. The ones who work for the city can shut down a pit at a moment’s notice if they decide the
smoke has not been thoroughly scrubbed and filtered, citing concerns about air quality. Some of us
believe that the aromas of brisket and ribs improve air quality, but rules are rules. The cost of a
flue that satisfies the government, Mr. Mangum said, can run from $10,000 to $15,000 for each floor.
Mighty Quinn’s is in a six-story building.
