Lupa
Italian
170 Thompson Street,
212-982-5089
IT’S dinner time, yet entering 
, the Roman-style osteria opened in 1999 by the team of Mario Batali and Joe Bastianich, is about as joyous an experience as trying to squeeze onto the subway at rush hour. You know you will be bumped and jostled, but you don’t know which direction it will come from.
Waiting at the bottleneck of the hostess’s stand, the blows land from behind, as more people struggle into the compressed entryway from the street. With no tables immediately available, you’re invited to wait at the bar, where all the stools are taken, so you stand in the narrow aisle between the bar and the tightly packed tables.
Back and forth, servers protecting platters of 
 or empty glasses utter soft, “Pardon me’s,” hoping you will notice them. A woman sitting at the bar facing away from you erupts in laughter, sending her stool shooting back into your leg, a painful reminder of Newton’s laws of motion. Departing diners shrug into bulky coats, almost knocking you into the servers as they swing their arms. Just as you are about to indulge in aggressive impulses, the announcement comes: your table is ready. Deep breath.
Lupa was a hit when it opened 12 years ago, and it continues to be today, judging by the crowds. A third of the tables are held for walk-ins, and if by chance you do want a reservation, particularly in the prime slot of 6:30 to 9:30 p.m., well, a month in advance is not too soon to try.
Back in 1999, Mr. Batali and Mr. Bastianich had just embarked on their road to superstardom. Babbo was already a big draw, but Del Posto, Esca and Casa Mono were yet to come, as were their various triumphs in television, books, retail and wine. When Lupa opened, it was surprisingly inexpensive. Appetizers cost $5 to $9, and main courses $9 to $15, and 
 then as a $25 and Under restaurant. That may seem laughable today, though it’s still relatively inexpensive. Still, as The New York Times has not evaluated Lupa since, I thought it was time to take another look.
Over the years I’ve had meals there that I’ve very much enjoyed, including an unforgettable occasion about which I can say only that it involved a catheter, a martini and a very large hypodermic needle. Indeed, I was predisposed to like Lupa, though I had made it a practice to arrive only at off hours to avoid the crowds.
Having now approached the restaurant in a more dedicated, critical way, at normal dinner hours, too, I’m left puzzled. Just as I wonder why people on the Upper West Side line up so patiently on Sunday mornings for mediocre brunches, I’m confounded by the people who subject themselves to the indignities of waiting for a table at Lupa. Is the food good enough to make it worth the aggravation? That’s a personal decision, though rewards do beckon.
In retrospect, the original Lupa team was awfully impressive. Mark Ladner, who is still nominally Lupa’s executive chef, went on to four-star glory at Del Posto. Jason Denton, who led the front of the house, is now a partner in a half-dozen New York restaurants, including Betto and ’inoteca. Robert Bohr, an early sommelier, was a partner in the late, lamented Cru and is now a high-profile wine consultant.
Today’s team is trying to maintain. The wine list, under the stewardship of Shin Tseng, is excellent, deep in most Italian regions, with many esoteric and moderately priced bottles as well. The food, under Cruz Goler, the chef de cuisine, strains to meet the demands of popularity. At its best it can be highly satisfying, but it’s inconsistent and sometimes has a slightly tired feeling.
This is especially true of the wide selection of antipasti. On one visit, a dish of sardines, <dish>golden raisins</dish> and <dish>pine nuts</dish> was a perfect combination of briny pungency, sweetness and savory, nutty crunch. On another, the dish was simply fishy and salty. Similarly, on one occasion, the soft, forgiving texture and mild flavor of tiny <dish>octopus</dish> went beautifully with the richness of chickpeas. On another visit, the octopus was tough and flavorless.
Sweet rounds of acorn squash were tasty enough, but served by themselves made for a dull platter. They were much more enjoyable another night, when yellow squash was mixed in. Many of the antipasti have a one-note quality, a blend of vinegar and sweetness repeated from one dish to the next, particularly apparent when you order a combination platter. On a more positive note, house-made salumi are superb, particularly the rustically earthy soft testa, or headcheese, and the coppa cotta, a gently spiced cured pork shoulder.
Pastas are another story. These simple, humble Roman recipes are as satisfying as they are elemental, and Lupa blessedly resists the urge to gussy them up with additional ingredients or to lay the sauce on too thickly. Bavette cacio e pepe, spaghetti alla carbonara, bucatini all’amatriciana and a special one night of a spiral pasta with onion, red pepper and guanciale are all variations on the same theme (pepper, cheese, maybe some pork, onion or tomato), and they are all superb. So was feathery light gnocchi with tangy sausage, fennel and tomato, and pappardelle in a savory, spicy lamb ragù — no tomato.
I loved a Tuesday night special of crisp, richly flavored duck in an agrodolce sauce, which balanced taut sweet and sour elements on a knife’s edge, and while thick slices of heritage pork were served plain, the meat flavors were pure and clear. Yet simplicity did not always benefit the main courses. Tender hanger steak with polenta and mushrooms was simply bland, as was bass with salt and olive oil. Saltimbocca (veal, prosciutto and sage) served like a giant omelet over escarole, and a Sunday special of pork shoulder stuffed with cheese, tomato and spices arrived in huge portions, too big to finish in one sitting, but very tasty for lunch the next day.
If you have room, desserts like an olive oil torte with roasted pears are richly satisfying, while sorbettos are simply refreshing. If it’s late, you may want to linger over Lupa’s superb selection of digestivi, after-dinner drinks ranging from intensely bitter to sweet that are delicious whether you need one or not.
At off hours — a late night, a midafternoon — Lupa continues to be delightful, satisfying and attentive. At prime times, Lupa feels more like commerce than cucina. I wish it were the other way around.
