Hakkasan New York
Chinese, Dim Sum
311 West 43rd Street,
212-776-1818
AT first, a hostile takeover did not appear to be the best solution to the problems of Hakkasan, the multimillion-dollar exercise in Orientalism one block off Times Square.
Protesting in the streets seemed like a more promising approach. It wouldn’t be hard to muster a mob of New Yorkers outraged by a restaurant that asks $48 for grilled Chilean sea bass or wok-fried lamb chops. After a few days of pickets out front, Hakkasan would cave and drop its lunatic prices. At the very least, it might apologize for tacking an extra $3.50 for a small bowl of rice onto the check of customers who are already paying around $50 for a main course, plus a bruising markup on the wine.
But while I was writing protest chants (“We like to eat/fried rice and such/but Hakkasan charges/much too much”), I began to see that the idea was flawed. People might conclude that the problem with Hakkasan is that its prices are too high, and that’s not right. The real problem is that its prices are too high for extremely restrained portions of food that is, in too many cases, about as interesting as a box of paper clips.
It’s not all dull. What I remember most vividly about my meals are some truly outstanding dim sum items, including first-rate steamed dumplings; a soft-shell crab with curry leaves and a tangle of crunchy egg-yolk threads; a tender and nuanced bite of lobster with XO sauce; and the dizziness and shortness of breath I felt whenever I tried to understand where the money had gone.
Some of it, no doubt, helps pay for the spectacular interior. The restaurant is part of a big expansion paid for by the Abu Dhabi-based investment company that now owns the 
 brand, with seven locations around the world.
At its first Manhattan restaurant, the 11,000-square-foot dining room has been diced into small chambers separated by silk-embroidered banquettes, walls of white Carrara marble and carved Chinese screens. Following the custom for intensively designed Asian restaurants, the lights grow dimmer and the music gets louder and untz-untz-untzier as the night goes on.
One evening before darkness had descended, I sat with a view of the kitchen, and what I saw made me suspect that Hakkasan has the crew and the equipment to be the greatest Chinese restaurant in New York.
There behind the screen was a squadron of woks blasted by flames that looked hot enough to refine steel. Each one was being tended by a white-jacketed cook, and each cook had the focus of a cobra. If you were in a cooking competition and this gang was the other team, you’d take one look and think, “It’s over.”
You wouldn’t stand a chance against people who can make crystal dumplings as good as Hakkasan’s, the meaty brown morels pressed right up against the see-through wrappers. Some other dim sum items (under the awkward name “Small Eat”) were just as expertly done, like the lovely shrimp and Chinese chive dumplings, green-edged ovals dotted with a red goji berry. The texture of the rice noodle slipped around Wagyu beef was superb, as was the tender steamed bun stuffed with meaty red char siu.
Tiny 
-duck puffs, in the shape of pumpkins with leaves of borage cress, looked as if they were made for a dollhouse vegetable patch. I would have adopted them if they hadn’t been so delicious.
The dim sum is, in fact, the best reason to eat at Hakkasan, particularly if you go for lunch or brunch, when the selection is greatest. (At any hour, though, it’s best to avoid the oily XO seafood puff and the ridiculous foie gras shrimp toast, a waste of perfectly good gavage.) Just don’t think of going if you balk at paying more than $3 a dumpling, or indeed if you demand any kind of rational correlation between price and product.
In the rest of the menu, though, the kitchen pours its considerable skills into dishes that only occasionally rise above the ordinary. Little squares of pipa duck under a crackling shell of skin were good enough to make me wish that a $39 serving brought more than 10 pieces, each the size of a tea bag.
But silky house-made 
 was misspent on a weird curry-and-black-pepper-flavored custard that traveled under the name “mabo tofu.” The crisp honey-toned skin on something called spicy roast ma la chicken was truly admirable, but the chicken meat itself was characterless, cast adrift without either the Sichuan peppercorn buzz (ma) or the chile-pepper burn (la) that the name promised.
Disconnects like this are so common that you wonder if the person who wrote Hakkasan’s menu has ever met the chef. Anything described as spicy was sure to be as mild as cream cheese. Run-of-the-mill udon noodles with duck had no trace of the advertised XO sauce.
Nothing I tasted at Hakkasan was unpleasant, but when the check easily surpassed $100 a person, it was hard not to feel cheated. It was like buying scalped tickets to see Anna Netrebko at the Met and then finding out that she would be performing the 
 songbook.
Sheer frustration finally put the idea of a takeover into my head. If a great restaurant was trapped somewhere inside Hakkasan, why not set it free? An elite crew of zealous Chinese-food fanatics should be able to pull it off. I can’t imagine that the smiling women in red Diane von Furstenberg dresses at the front podium would put up much of a fight, especially once they saw that we came as liberators.
First, we would tell the cooks to make the food in their hearts instead of the lackluster recipes that somebody in the management company apparently believes non-Chinese people like. Unfortunately, we wouldn’t be able to drop the prices at first, at least not until we had reimbursed the owners for confiscating their restaurant. But once we had done that — I foresee a very amicable transaction, after which we would all share a plate or two of the braised abalone with truffles, having a good laugh over the $888 price tag — we could let gravity take over.
If you’re with me, let’s meet outside the restaurant at 6 tonight. Oh, and somebody please bring some good music. The stuff they play at Hakkasan at night now — it’s enough to put crazy ideas in your head.
