HanYang BunSik
Korean
150-51 Northern Boulevard,
718-461-5924
Don’t be distracted by the tented stalls outside the 24-hour 
 in Flushing, Queens, with their promises of baked eggs and potato pancakes shaped like hearts. There will be time for them.
Go in, past the stacks of 15-pound bags of rice and the clothing nook. (If you’ve reached the counter selling deli manjoo, little spongecake fish with guts of sweet cream, you’ve gone too far.) Stop at the sign that says 
 in Korean, with an English subtitle: Snack Corner.
The name is literal. The restaurant, begun 14 years ago as another tented stall, now occupies a proper corner. Orders are placed at the kitchen, but food is delivered to the tables, packed efficiently back to back with benches that fit three people to a side, provided they’re feeling friendly. Dishes fall under the Korean category of bunsik, or snacks, though many are more substantial than snacks in the Western definition, a reminder of how far we lag behind other cultures in this culinary genre.
Kimchi-and-beef dumplings arrive on plastic foam, under plastic wrap, as if from a 7-Eleven. They are potent nevertheless, as is the similarly packaged soondae, a dark sausage of ground beef and pork in a shiny casing that suggests the skin of a Goth balloon. There’s a hint of pork blood seeping through, its moody tang offset by embedded grains of sticky rice.
A platter of modumjeon, described on the menu as assorted pancakes, turns out to be a selection of fish swaddled in scrambled eggs, slabs of green pepper sandwiching ground beef, beef patties like homeless sliders and rounds of zucchini, all lightly battered and fried. They seem to exhale oil, and are appallingly delicious. They could be a distant cousin to tempura, as kimbap (rice and vegetables rolled inside strips of seaweed) is to sushi. But here, the rice, seasoned with little more than salt and perilla oil, lacks a vinegary-sweet bite and is merely refreshing.
Trust your neighbors. On one visit, a regular at the next table kindly shared her staples: kabocha porridge, the sweetness tempered by pulverized sticky rice; rice cakes like elongated gnocchi, muddled with gochujang, soy and sugar; and, most beloved, a skewered hot dog with an airy crust of panko, prefried and kept cool in a refrigerated case, then recrisped in a wok to order — a corn dog from the fairy realm.
Larger dishes include doughy knife-cut noodles half-stained with carrot and beet juice, slashes of color in a pale broth creamy with perilla seed (wild sesame). Budae-jigae, a soul-affirming stew suffused with kimchi and mobbed by torn bacon, wedges of Spam and a hot dog cut into curling diagonals, comes on a portable burner with a packet of instant ramen, to add or not, as you wish. (It doesn’t hurt.)
Late at night, a sense of nostalgia takes hold, as men in suits hunker over glasses of soju beside walls papered with photos of Korean pines. HanYang BunSik may not be a formal place, but there is still an abbreviated form of banchan, the parade of small dishes that attends every Korean meal. Depending on your order, this may include a bowl of crystalline brine, delicate and piercing, like a memory of kimchi.
The owner, In Soon Park, once the chef, has passed her recipes on to others. Soon she will open a new restaurant, Dadam, on West 32nd Street in Manhattan’s Koreatown. It may be a boon for those leery of traveling to the last stop on the No. 7 train and beyond, but they would miss the chance to stroll through HanYang Mart’s sprawling aisles, to pick up freeze packs of black pork jowl, cans of silkworm pupae and artisanal soybean paste made with water from an aquifer 200 meters deep.
And have you forgotten the tents outside? There, a sunken-cheeked cook makes ho-dduk, a kind of flat Korean doughnut sealed around brown sugar syrup. “Two dollars,” he barked at me one night, then smiled. “Two hundred dollars.” The warm ho-dduk bristled between my fingers, and it was almost worth it.
