Machiavelli
Italian
519 Columbus Avenue,
212-724-2658
Eating at the grandiose Machiavelli is like visiting a museum of Italian food — complete with long-winded exhibition catalogs. Reams of paper arrive with the menu, bearing tales of the 
 who decorated the walls, the ceramist who designed the plates, the coloratura soprano who even now is singing into your ear. (There is live music at dinner and sometimes at lunch.)
Stepping in from Columbus Avenue is like discovering a crack in the space-time continuum: suddenly, candelabra are twinkling, the wallpaper is sumptuous, the chairs wide-hipped and warm. The high ceilings swallow sound, making the room peaceful.
It’s possible to have a lovely evening and a very good meal here, but it demands a wiliness worthy of the prince himself. (With high prices across the board, it’s equally possible to leave feeling underwhelmed by bland food and listless servers.)
First, navigate the vast menu, representing the entire Italian spectrum: Roman lamb chops ($37), tortellini from Bologna ($20) and Piedmontese bean stew ($10). Find a safe haven in 
, which are crisp and carefully made. Salumi ($16) are served with hot crescentine, folds of fried dough that warm and bring out the flavor of the meats.
Some of the least delicious dishes are the most upscale, like vitello tonnato ($17), thickly sliced and thinly flavored. Some of the most delicious are the 
 ($17 to $22), like tortelloni stuffed with smoked and fresh mozzarella, all deftly rolled out in a nook behind the bar by the pasta maker, Andrea Fiano, who tolerates the procession of child spectators.
The thin-crust pizzas ($14 to $18) are not the stuff that cults are made of, but they have a satisfying char and chew. Tiramisù, ice creams, sorbets and a profiterole-like dessert called bongo-bongo are fine; the more ambitious desserts, like pine nut tart ($8), do not come off.
The owner, Nathalie de La Fontaine, is clearly committed to the arts (the restaurant even has a music director), and more attention to the culinary arts might help Machiavelli survive on this long-cursed corner.
