Eolo Sicilia a Tavola
Italian
190 Seventh Avenue,
646-225-6606
New York’s march toward more elegant Italian restaurants continues at Eolo, a warm new meta-Sicilian restaurant in Chelsea. Meta-Sicilian because, with dishes like lamb and beef meatballs with sesame cream ($12), cured tongue with couscous ($12) and roasted leaves of brussels sprouts with herb-marinated butternut squash, Eolo does not reproduce food actually eaten in Sicily. Instead, it is a fantasia of what Sicilian food might be, reimagined by a New York chef with a respect for seasonal ingredients and knowledge of that island’s Greek, Italian, Arab and French influences.
Melissa Muller Daka, formerly of Osteria del Gallo Nero, is Eolo’s co-owner, chef and resident scribe. The restaurant’s name is a reference to Aeolus, a Greek god of the winds — but so far, Icarus, who flew too close to the sun and fell to earth on melted wings, has been the restaurant’s truer inspiration. Eolo needs less fantasy and more firmness in the kitchen to ensure that the soup is not watery, that the pasta is not undercooked and oversauced, and that antipasti are not landing on the tables refrigerator-cold.
But there are signs of potential greatness here. A composed 
 of tiny beet cubes, pickled 
, frisée, earthy chestnut cream and spicy cheese ($11) sounds mad but tastes marvelous. Many dishes integrate small, sweet-tart flourishes like poached pear, pickled melon, even orange marmalade and mustard seed “caviar.” Zucchini slices are sparked with lemon juice and stewed in olive oil with fennel and quantities of minced garlic (vegetable antipasti are two for $7, or four for $13). A bed of melted red cabbage and turnips, braised in sherry vinegar and slipped under a puck of roast pork ($25), is good enough to elevate the entire cruciferous family.
Desserts ($7 to $11) reflect the surer hand of the pastry chef Tony Marcos, with a standout version of cannoli, its chocolate- and candied-orange-scented ricotta cream stuffed into small cones of well-crisped dough. Bites of cheesecake are coated in salty-sweet cookie crumbs, served with soft-cooked strawberries and fennel and a perfectly pitched rosemary gelato. Other nice touches include deferential service, intense La Colombe coffee, as well as wines, many from Sicily, starting at $4.50 for a half-glass. 
