Il Salumaio
Italian
1731 Second Avenue  ,
646-852-6876
 was not supposed to be a restaurant. It opened last June in Yorkville, on the Upper East Side, as an old-world salumeria with hocks of prosciutto and mesh sacks of soppressata clustered like chimes over monumental cheeses.
Equally monumental sandwiches were available, along with pasta made to order, but there was nowhere on the premises to sit and eat.
“People were getting mad,” said Fabio Casella, one of the owners. So he and his brother, Ciro, who also run the Neapolitan pizzeria San Matteo up the block, capitulated. In December, they shrank the deli counter to a single glass case and filled the rest of the narrow space with tables.
Cured meats still dangle at the back of the dining room; sandwiches still outnumber pastas. But the description on the awning has changed from “delicatessen” to “wine bar.” And this slot on Second Avenue between a dry cleaner and a nail spa is now turning out satisfyingly nostalgic Italian fare.
Thank the querulous customers who bullied the restaurant into existence, for otherwise we would not have these perfect arancini, orbs of arborio rice bound by egg and Parmesan and flecked with spicy soppressata. They are implausibly airy considering their girth, fried quickly so that the thinnest possible shell forms and the rice stays loose inside.
A similar trick is played with frittatine di pasta, rugged fritters that, cut open, reveal tangles of creamy tagliatelle with stray tabs of prosciutto cotto. Meatballs are submerged in olive oil and deep-fried until just shy of done, then baked in tomato sauce, which leaves them firm and springy while still approaching liquefaction.
Note how often you can count the ingredients of a dish on one hand: rough cuts of octopus, simply boiled and dressed with nothing more than olive oil, lemon and parsley; wafers of zucchini quickly sautéed and tossed with red wine vinegar, mint and garlic. The flavors are direct, effective, age-old.
The Casella brothers grew up in Salerno, on the Amalfi Coast of Italy. Fabio came to the United States 15 years ago, at age 21, and for a time made mozzarella at the Bronx institution 
, on Arthur Avenue, as respectable a pedigree for opening a salumeria in New York as there is.
At dinner, cured meats arrive on platters, calligraphed with fat and heaped like dropped handkerchiefs. They are arranged by degree of sugar and spice, from delicate capicola to speck with its half-remembered smoke, all imported from Italy save a slightly truculent house-made dry sausage.
But pasta is the reason the neighbors clamored for seats. Sauces are mostly red and uniformly robust: big tubes of paccheri all’amatriciana, with a sauce of long-broken-down tomatoes larded with guanciale, cured pork jowl; rich tagliatelle alla bolognese, almost more beef than sauce; ravioli packed with porcini mushrooms, nearly drowned yet somehow retaining texture in a tomato sauce thickened with cream and speck.
One night, cortecce, a pasta that looks like split-open penne, took on a celadon hue as the base for a mostly zucchini, partly basil pesto, rounded out by almonds alongside the usual buttery pine nuts. There were pops of rock shrimp and, on top, seemingly a flock’s worth of sheep’s milk ricotta. “This pesto has a shelf life of one day,” Mr. Casella informed my table when he delivered it, and it did have a tinge of evanescence, a taste closer to the garden than the larder.
Bottles of white wine are stocked in the soda freezer, bottles of red on a high shelf. All are Italian in origin and calibrated for the unfussy mood — particularly a plummy, forthright Montepulciano d’Abruzzo from Collefrisio — with only a few surpassing $30.
Among the desserts, cannoli are still fragrant with orange peel, despite a trip from Sicily; pasticiotti, little custard tarts with a cookie-dough-like crust, make a case for the home front, hailing from the Gian Piero Bakery in Astoria, Queens. The surprise is cassata siciliana, a cake with hard royal icing in an almost unnatural milky green, topped by a lurid maraschino cherry.
It shrieks sugar, but wait: inside are spongecake and soothing ricotta, enveloped in marzipan. It is more complex than you thought, and no sweeter than you want.
