Glasserie
Mediterranean
95 Commercial Street,
718-389-0640
“Seventy-two dollars for rabbit at a 
 site?” my friend said, incredulous, when I invited him to dinner at Glasserie, a new restaurant in Greenpoint at the northernmost tip of Brooklyn, next to 
. He declined.
His loss, as it turned out. The rabbit was a glory: legs, confit in duck fat, with a frisson of smoke from the grill; saddle, scarlet with paprika; and belly and extra bits, simmered in rabbit-bone stock until exactingly tender. One of several large-format meals with multiple dishes, it was meant to feed three. Four found it ample.
But what set the rabbit apart was nuance. Hawayij, a Yemeni spice blend whose arsenal includes cumin and cardamom, boosted the flavor of the saddle’s lean meat and brought contour to the stew of rabbit trimmings, turning what were supposed to be leftovers into the showpiece.
The chef, Sara Kramer, spent time in the 
 family of restaurants, most recently as executive sous-chef at 
. At Glasserie, she diverges from the New Brooklyn model by reaching back to the Levantine spices of her heritage. (Her mother is part Israeli.) Sea bream is dusted with urfa biber, whose concentrated sweetness evokes prunes, and served atop a slab of grilled watermelon jolted by Aleppo pepper. Another Turkish pepper, marash, brings a confluence of fruit and smoke to slow-roasted lamb shoulder.
Ms. Kramer grew up eating malawach, a flaky fried Yemeni bread in which dough and butter are alternated in layers, and she recreates it faithfully here. There is flatbread, too, thinner and loosely rolled, with dark stripes of char. I tasted mostly ash. “But that’s exactly what it’s like in Israel, when it comes off the taboon,” one of my companions said.
Elsewhere on the  menu, lamb and bulgur croquettes reference the Middle Eastern snack kibbeh, but with the meat confined to the outer crust and an airy interior of sweet corn, ricotta and feta. A bowl of what looks like hummus masabacha is in fact a purée of gigante beans, with a lemony touch of sumac.
The loveliest dishes seem effortless: squid and eggplant interspersed with sweet bursts of cherry tomatoes and underscored by raw garlic, pine nuts and saffron; grilled chicken in a milk of puréed almonds spiked with cinnamon and zhug, a Yemeni hot sauce. Yogurt suffused with preserved lemon transforms brown basmati rice into a fanciful near-risotto.
There are missed opportunities, like a pairing of peach and grilled tomato muddied by yogurt and a mozzarella-like Syrian cheese. Pepquiños, which look like tiny watermelons and taste like cucumber, and husk cherries, tart with an almost floral sweetness, add little more than novelty to a tumble of eggplant and purple peppers.
The husk cherries reappear, to better effect, alongside panna cotta whose almondy, almost bitter note comes from cream steeped with cherry stones and mahlepi, a spice ground from the kernels found inside the stones. (The slightly cerebral desserts are the province of Pamela Yung, previously at 
.)
Service, overseen by Sara Conklin, the owner, has an easygoing warmth. One night, a waiter confided that the figs accompanying a cardamom semifreddo came from a tree in his backyard.
The space has high ceilings, but is warrenlike, with seating areas that feel like separate rooms, arranged around a central bar. Light is doled out by long amber fluorescents, quilted-glass bulbs and candles in small jars. A door leads to what may be the eeriest outdoor space in the city: a terrace overlooking a dim cobblestoned internal courtyard — essentially a back alley, through which every now and then a motorcycle roars.
For now, Glasserie is the only storefront on a blank stretch of Greenpoint that Manhattanites may find charmingly desolate or simply interplanetary. (Friends who live in the neighborhood greet the address with a shrug: “Oh, right, around the corner from the little place that does the Japanese breakfast.”)
This won’t last: a developer plans to build two looming residential towers next door. After a recent meal, my companions trooped off to a friend’s nearby roof, where they gazed at the view across the river, already mourning its disappearance.
