Betto
Italian
138 North Eighth Street,
718-384-1904
Jason Denton’s empire includes ’ino, two ’inotecas, Corsino Cantina and this roomy spot that opened this summer.
 is much less Italian than its siblings (in fact, the few Italian plates, like rice balls and spaghetti and meatballs, are the dullest things on the menu). It has a modern rustic interior, an all-American cheese-and-charcuterie list, and a menu that emphasizes slow cooking and “responsibly sourced” ingredients.
The chef, Shaunna Sargent, has an intimate relationship with her stone-floored oven but doesn’t use it for pizza. Each night after service, at least two animals (
, avert your eyes) are roasted overnight; ducks and chickens, fish from Long Island, beef sides from upstate New York. This “choice cuts” menu is a great deal: for $16 to $30, each person gets a healthy-size cut of flesh, plus three vegetables (like roasted carrots, olive-oil smashed potatoes, simmered spinach) and three sauces (anything from a concentrated chicken-y jus to salsa verde to housemade ranch dressing). It’s a companionable way to eat, but the entire table doesn’t have to play together: one person can indulge in a juicy pork loin, but still fork up carrots from the same platter as the people splitting the whole fish. Many dishes, including duck fat-fried potato nuggets, are served in roasting pans and small pots, a nice homey touch.
Betto is more restful than its siblings, but not as boring as that word implies. It is restful because it is quiet, because its bartenders are wholly professional, and because its menu is extremely flexible. There are starters small — lovely 
 ($9 to $12) with roasted fruits and vegetables: plums in September; recently, sunchokes and squash — and large — littlenecks steamed with scallions and homemade sausage ($14) — that can make a light dinner on their own or shared. The results are less like restaurant meals and more like a great dinner at home: spontaneous, unpretentious, casually plated and — almost always — delicious. 
 
