Cafe Kristall
Austrian
70 Mercer Street,
212-274-1500
In New York, if the bud vase on your cafe table holds a tasteful spray of asparagus and edelweiss, it is likely that the chef Kurt Gutenbrunner — the city’s resident artist of all things Austrian — is behind it.
Having built his empire of schlag and schnitzel, Mr. Gutenbrunner just opened a mini-cafe in SoHo’s sparkly Swarovski Crystallized store. (The brand, like many of the artists in the Neue Galerie museum ,where Mr. Gutenbrunner also runs Café Sabarsky, is Austrian in origin.)
Quietly, for this banging, shopping-mad neighborhood, Café Kristall serves a greatest-Viennese-hits roster all day,  with goulash ($8) and quark dumplings with buttery spinach ($15).
The reason to come, though, is the pastry counter, where you’ll get strong 
 served on a tray in proper Viennese style, and elegant sweets, made by the pastry chef Matthew Lodes, that aren’t available in other outposts of the Gutenbrunner empire.
His Linzer 
 are spiked with hazelnuts and deeply toasty; the Florentiner is a chewy marvel of caramel, 
, orange and slivered almonds ($2.50 each). The best pastries are the round chocolate-covered Mozartkugel (chocolate mousse, nougat, pistachios) and the slim Eszterhazy, confected of toasted almonds and vanilla and topped with a Salvador Dalí mustache of chocolate (both $6).
The savory menu, nicely attuned to the store’s coltish clientele, is streamlined to include 
, tastes of raw fish like yellowtail with avocado and  Austrian pumpkinseed oil ($13), soups and sandwiches. An open-face egg salad sandwich showered with fiery paprika ($10) provides tasty fuel between bouts with Topshop and Uniqlo. Other modern touches include spaetzle pan-fried with shrimp and broccoli ($16), a plush and filling dish that tastes like something a homesick Cantonese music student marooned at the Konservatorium Wien might come up with. The ideas are good, but in these early days execution is sometimes off.
The interior is no haven for Mitteleuropean traditionalists: the pale, luxurious room is like an airport lounge, or a museum cafe in a very wealthy country.
The mostly Austrian wine list is worth an off-road trip from familiar gruner veltliners  into Neuberger and Muskateller territory.
