Five Leaves
Australian
18 Bedford Avenue,
718-383-5345
BEFORE asking the waiter at Five Leaves about a drink on the cocktail list, the Whiskey in a Jar ($9), I had to ask about his tattoos.
They were that striking. On one arm was a silhouette of an elk; on the other a water tower, the kind that dots the low-slung skyline of Greenpoint, the neighborhood Five Leaves calls home. “My friend came up with this in, like, five minutes,” he said proudly. “It’s my tribute to Brooklyn.”
Or a certain notion of a scruffy, stylish Brooklyn, where a mixed drink is just an eight-ounce Mason jar, ice and a blend of three whiskeys. (“Woodford, Jack and Johnnie,” I was told later.)
Sometimes you don’t need much more, especially in a room this appealing. Five Leaves feels both handmade and industrial, as if it were built with materials from a salvaged tug. The beauty is in the details: the worn floors, the filament lights and lead sinkers above the bar, the skim-coated sheets of steel on the walls.
It’s a restaurant that could get by on looks alone. (And pedigree; more on that later.) But despite the modest ambitions and reasonable prices  — it’s really a small neighborhood spot, open daily from 8 a.m. to 12:30 a.m. with breakfast served until well into the afternoon  — the kitchen, taken over recently by Ken Addington, turns out unexpectedly refined Australian comfort food.
Which isn’t so different from New York comfort food: charcuterie ($14), Blue Point oysters ($12 for 6) or, most memorably, fresh ricotta ($9) made daily downstairs. Topped with thyme, sea salt, cracked pepper and a hunk of honeycomb, the ricotta is airy, creamy and enough to share. But it doesn’t have a clear role, which might be why it’s available all day. Is it a side dish or a dessert? Is it good for breakfast? Lunch? Does it go with a jar of whiskey? The answer is yes.
Mr. Addington, formerly executive chef at Bette, brings sophistication to the simple menu. Juicy and crisp roast chicken ($18) appears with a stack of potato gratin and chard, but it was the flavorful hen-of-the-woods mushrooms, cooked with red wine and demi-glace and finished with port and cream, that had me swabbing the plate. And the shepherd’s pie ($18), ground lamb with a touch of cayenne, is topped with honey-roasted carrots, Jerusalem artichokes and a layer of potato and celery root purée. It was slightly sweet, mildly spicy and wholly satisfying.
When Five Leaves opened in September, coverage fixated on one of the investors, the late actor Heath Ledger. It’s understandable. The restaurant was named by Mr. Ledger’s father for “Five Leaves Left,” Nick Drake’s first album, and the actor’s estate remains a silent partner with Jud Mongell, Mr. Ledger’s friend from Australia. But Mr. Mongell and his wife, Kathy Mecham, give it  a mom-and-pop feel, sometimes serving tables (they met while working at Café Gitane), or making sure the NuYorican Funk Experience isn’t skipping on the turntable at night, when  a good-natured crush of people wait at the bar for tables.
During the rest of the day there’s a  steady, smaller crowd. One  couple spent much of a recent weekday afternoon working their way through breakfast, a small pile of European newspapers and an affogato ($5) with 
 from Il Laboratorio del Gelato.
The espresso ($2.25), made with Wandering Goat beans from Eugene, Ore., is one of the best coffees in New York. And the house-cured gravlax ($8), served with a toasted Sullivan Street Bakery roll, holds its own against the city’s most storied salmon. Not that everything was perfect. Baked beans and toast ($10) was a poached egg away from fulfilling its potential, and sage scrambled eggs ($7) tasted flat despite the aged cheddar.  But the misplays are easy to overlook, especially when sun is streaming inside. Every neighborhood should have a restaurant this welcoming, with food this rewarding.
18 Bedford Avenue (Lorimer Street), Greenpoint, Brooklyn; (718) 383-5345; 
.
 Gravlax; bowl of fresh ricotta; shepherd’s pie; roast chicken.
 Breakfast $3 to $13, lunch $7 to $14, dinner $7 to $15 for sides, $13 to $21 for main dishes.
 Cash only.
Not accepted.
Daily 8 a.m. to 12:30 a.m.
 All on one level.
