Pondicheri
Indian
15 West 27th Street,
646-878-4375
“This is the first place you’ve taken me where I’d come back and spend my own money,” a friend said in the middle of lunch at 
. He is highly sensitive to pretension and unjustified expense, so whenever I take him along on one of my hunting parties, I try to pick something with a high ratio of flavor to price. At Pondicheri, I finally hit his sweet spot.
By that time, I was sure I’d be back, too. The chef and owner, Anita Jaisinghani, chose New York as the first site of a string of all-day Indian cafes she hopes to open around the country, modeled on her 
. She also has a more formal Indian restaurant there called 
, but if she brought that to Manhattan, she would have to compete with such restaurants as 
, 
 and 
. There isn’t anything in the city quite like Pondicheri.
A few blocks north of the Flatiron Building, it inhabits a space so cavernous that maps may be useful. (It wasn’t until my fourth meal that I discovered a corner table hidden behind a wall all the way in the back of the restaurant.) The sheer number of seats is one of the things that makes it worth keeping in mind, because Pondicheri would work for so many occasions.
When I wanted to have breakfast alone, I’d go to the front counter and ask for a cup of masala chai. Pondicheri makes it smooth and strong, with more than a whisper of spice. Then I’d find a table where I could eat the wonderful aloo paratha with my hands, loving the way the crisp shell collided with the soft potatoes inside, feeling the mustard oil rake the back of my throat, licking the ghee from my fingers. Or I might get the masala eggs, firmly scrambled with fennel, onions, peppers and spices, and then spread out over a wedge of spiced carrot paratha.
For a morning meeting with people who’d never seen me lick ghee off my fingers, I’d probably point to a few things behind the glass pastry cases — whatever looked good that day. I’d hope for a return of the fig cake I had last week, essentially fig preserves baked into a muffin top.
And I’d keep an eye out for the honey mesquite cake, which is delicate with almond and mesquite flour, savory with ginger and other warm spices. Honey has been spritzed around, but the cake hasn’t been drenched in it. It’s a delicious example of Ms. Jaisinghani’s strategy of importing Indian flavors into American daily life.
The best time to take Pondicheri’s full measure is between 11 a.m. and 3 p.m., when servers at the counter will take orders for either breakfast or lunch. Beet uttapam is technically a breakfast dish here. But this spongy, slightly tangy pancake topped with a fried egg makes a perfect lunch; it is served on a thali platter next to little metal cups holding a nice crunchy salad, some cilantro chutney and a turmeric soup that tastes as if it held the secret of eternal health. In the nonvegetarian version, another cup carries a small crumbly heap of lamb keema, very tasty stuff.
There are roti wraps called frankies, as well as salads and curries, like the chicken stewed in a tomato-tinged curry of unusual complexity. It’s named Chicken 25 after the number of seasonings in the curry, and it is worth asking for even though it sounds like a genetic engineering experiment. I liked this much more than the sayel lamb kofta, meatballs in a nondescript meat sauce.
The snacks and side dishes that become available after 11 a.m. are exciting, too. I can’t remember a meat samosa that I liked better than the ones that Pondicheri fills with lentils and goat braised in spices. Papdi chaat, a plate of semolina crackers and lentil dumplings buried under yogurt and chutney, is completely messy and a joy to eat.
My friend who’s planning to come back to Pondicheri insisted we get the fried okra, one of his benchmarks for Indian kitchens. Crunchy and free of any trace of goo, it passed his test. And I love Pondicheri’s “desi fries,” which start with curly fries (a very good place to start, as Maria von Trapp would say) that are blasted with an irresistible spice mix.
After lunch, I stopped at the bakery counter, where the morning pastries had been replaced by cookies (there’s a great spiced chocolate chip and a puffy ginger cookie with a scalloped edge that makes it look like a paw) and appealing lemon bars that take their flavor more from the aromatic peel than from the sour juice.
Raised in India, Ms. Jaisinghani earned a degree in microbiology, with the idea that she would eventually work as a pathologist. Her career was held up while she had two children. (Her daughter, Ajna Jai, now manages her New York City restaurant.) When she was ready to work again, she didn’t send her résumé to a laboratory but to one of the best restaurants in Houston. The two years she spent learning about flour, sugar and eggs in the pastry kitchen at 
 must account for the skill and creativity of Pondicheri’s bakery.
If you go for dinner, the menu changes shape again. The food is a little dressier, is ordered at the table and falls more neatly into appetizers and main courses.
My dinner started very well with tangy, tamarind-marinated quail, with a pine-nut stuffing tucked into the breast. Some lamb skewers were disappointingly dry, but I was wild about a version of saag paneer made with mustard greens; as soon as I tasted it, I knew I was going to crave the sharper, more assertive flavor the next time I had saag paneer made with spinach.
The impressive size of Pondicheri may be an advantage at lunch, because it virtually guarantees that you will find a seat. At dinner, though, it works against the place. The crowds so far haven’t been big or energetic enough to fill the room, and even the long bar doesn’t do much to turn up the voltage.
The staff can be a bit desultory, too, although I found this more charming than off-putting. (I loved the deadpan way our server said, describing the crudités appetizer, “All the vegetables come from the Greenmarket, if that’s of any interest.”)
Pondicheri is not the place to take a crowd of people who want dinner to be the show. But that’s fine. It doesn’t need to do absolutely everything a restaurant can do when it already does several things so well.
