Marc Forgione
American, New American
134 Reade Street,
212-941-9401
IN the imaginary New York of first novels and romantic comedies, there is often a restaurant like Marc Forgione, a brick-walled neighborhood spot glittering with candlelight and the promise of a third date going well.
The restaurant is rustic and urban at once, a loft that might be in a town farther up the Hudson River. A long bar sits to the west, with a warm, rough-hewn dining room beside it. A couple sits at the corner table under mirrors, eating crisp chicken in a gleaming black pan, the meat sitting on top of golden potatoes draped with verdant broccoli rabe. In real life, they kiss.
Around them sit other couples, young families, people on their way to that state. Later, the scene will shift toward off-work analysts from the counting houses nearby, local roués at the bar and shy visitors peeking at them over glasses of savagnin. Service is warm and practiced, the food about three times better than it needs to be.
Marc Forgione, which opened two years ago on Reade Street just west of Hudson Street, is a model neighborhood restaurant in a neighborhood that has no shortage of them. Named for its chef, a partner in the enterprise with Christopher Blumlo, it was known as Forge when it opened, but a lawsuit threatened by the owner of a Miami restaurant of the same name forced a change in 2009.
There are elements of Italian cooking on the freewheeling and often-changing menu, and French and Southeast Asian notes as well. You might start with a hiramasa tartare with avocado and Sichuan buttons, flower buds with a fiery, numbing taste,  then move on to scallops in a Thai curry, and finish with 
 pie. Really, you might.
Mr. Forgione’s food is sometimes sweet. Other times, it is salty, sour or spicy. Sometimes it is all four — and loudly so. The brashness is deeply and above all American: an augmentation of international cuisines in a land of plenty.
These menu predilections will come as no surprise to those who follow the bloodlines of professional kitchens. Mr. Forgione is a son of Larry Forgione, a precursor to the celebrity chefs of today whose cooking was so linked to the notion of a national cuisine that his flagship restaurant, founded in 1983, was called An American Place.
Mr. Forgione the younger continues the family tradition.
Recently there has been on his appetizer menu a dish called barbecued 
, a riff on an old Paul Prudhomme recipe. Mr. Forgione naps four oysters in a Cajun béchamel, with a little bit of pepper-jack 
 and a dot of barbecue sauce, then runs them under the high heat of an industrial broiler. With a dusting of fiery spice powder — Ararat blend, from La Boîte à Epice — these come to the table in the manner of a postcard from Chartres Street, New Orleans.
They taste of time travel, of a realization that sometimes the future lies in the past. Baked oysters under béchamel. With cheese! We might have forgotten all about that, those of us who generally sit in the sort of restaurants where people take pictures of their food. Two orders for four people would not be a mistake.
Also on the appetizer menu: a TriBeCa take on Singaporean chili-crab, with the crabs swapped out for little cull 
 cut into delicate bites, and the steamed buns that generally accompany the dish replaced with buttery Texas toast. The lobster swims in a fiery sauce of sriracha and butter, ginger, soy sauce and lobster stock, with a faint zing of lime juice. And what seems like really quite a lot of the stuff when the dish first arrives proves just enough for mop up with the bread at the end.
Wait, these are just appetizers? Yes, and more of them follow, big boys with grace, as if they were Hells Angels dancing a jig.
There is a kind of mac and cheese, for instance, with toasted orzo and gamy bits of lamb neck, marscapone flecked with black pepper and mint, and a garlicky crust of bread crumbs and melted Parmesan: a haute stoner’s reward. Also, a BLT 
 that took up the very end of the summer’s tomato season, with beautiful fruit cut into fat dice, with long, crisp bits of fried pigs’ ears and a smoked onion rémoulade in the role of  —  what, mayonnaise, bread, both? (Who cares!)
And perhaps best of all: a bowl of peppery gnocchi in a sauce of demi-glace keeping company with matchsticks of apple, micro-celery and knuckle-hunks of veal sausage made lively with coriander. Just like grandma’s.
Main courses mostly steer closer to the center of the channel. But some, though not all, are quite good. (Scallops in a “lobster-Thai curry emulsion” ran hard aground.)
The suddenly fashionable beef cut known as flatiron steak (it is the top portion of a cow’s shoulder, a steak that commercial butchers only recently figured out how to harvest effectively) was excellent, arriving on a wide plate with rich Maytag cheese butter and bordelaise sauce, along with chanterelles and black kale, its marbled meat tangy beside its sweet, salty accompaniments.
Rounds of striped bass came wrapped in thin bacon, with mustard greens, cranberry beans and a soft, elegant broth. Mr. Forgione had deep-fried bits of the skin to make a kind of popcorn garnish for the dish. The texture raised the entire preparation higher.
He paired a bit of pork tenderloin with pork belly and deep-fried nuggets of pig cheek, along with clams and matsutake mushrooms, then dusted the dish with black garlic powder so that it had a mysterious, almost smoky finish. This worked nicely as well.
Mr. Forgione also excels at simplicity, however: That crisp, golden chicken with potatoes and broccoli rabe, cooked under a brick and served in that big black iron pan, is the restaurant’s best dish. The whole mess sits above a run of caper-shallot butter, dressed with chili flakes and parsley, and if it were a record you’d want to play it again and again.
Eat it after a plate of those barbecued oysters, with a bottle of one of the restaurant’s big and fairly priced California reds, then finish with a dessert from Mr. Forgione’s pastry chef, Ashton Warren — a banana-split sundae, for instance, with fried banana and lots of chocolate.
This all may leave you feeling a little rough in the morning. But you’ll be back, American.
 
 
★★
134 Reade Street (Hudson Street), TriBeCa; (212) 941-9401; 
.
Maybe the coolest restaurant in Dutchess County.
 Moderately loud, especially in the bar, but not overbearing.
 Barbecued oysters, gnocchi, chili-
, mac and cheese, flatiron steak, chicken-under-
a-brick.
 Reasonable list of old- and new-world varietals, decently priced.
 Appetizers, $11 to $16; main courses, $26 to $67.
Monday to Saturday, 5 to 11 p.m.; Sunday, 11:30 a.m. to 3 p.m. and 5   to 9 p.m.
At least a week ahead.
 All major cards.
 No.
 Ratings range from zero to four stars and reflect the reviewer’s reaction to food, ambience and service, with price taken into consideration. Menu listings and prices are subject to change.
