Hill Country Chicken
Southern
1123 Broadway,
212-257-6446
Hill Country proved that great Texas barbecue can exist in Manhattan. Now the owners repeat the feat (down the street) with fried chicken. Counter service and high ceilings make Hill Country Chicken feel like a fantastically pleasant cafeteria, with quaint wallpaper, a rec-room basement and a big, loud lunchtime crowd.
It is turning out some top-level food that’s hard to find around here: fried chicken that is a contender for the best in the city, plus pimiento cheese ($3 with celery and carrot sticks), banana cream pie ($3), exemplary French fries ($2.50) and craggy, tangy buttermilk biscuits ($1).
Chicken ($1.75 for a wing, up to $5.50 for a breast) comes in two styles: classic and Mama Els’, both deep-fried. The lovely mahogany chunks are laid out on racks, so you can choose not only the style but precisely the piece you desire. (For fried-chicken freaks, this is key.)
Classic is cooked with the skin on, and offers a basic, satisfying palette of salt, fat, crunch and pepper.  Mama Els’ (for Elsia, owner Marc Glosserman’s grandmother) tastes like the ancestor of Shake ’N Bake, with an herbed cracker-crumb crust that is nicely crunchy but doesn’t make up for the lack of skin; also, the herb flavors are distracting.
Try both kinds, unadorned or with shakes of honey, hot sauce and herb mix, all thoughtfully provided.
Mama Els’s works best in the Chickwich ($8), a breast half pressed in a toasted, buttered potato bun with homemade “fire-n-ice” cucumber-onion pickles.
Pie fillings are supersweet (though not by Texas standards) and most sides are disappointing: mashed potatoes shot through with greasy cheese; bland corn salad; and carrot-raisin slaw (no, thanks; $2.50 each).
But free-flowing strawberry lemonade ($3.25) and waves of friendliness and efficiency from the large staff make up for it.
The club sandwich ($10) provides a layer of bacon and avocado that tastes like overkill, and fried chicken salad ($9.75) seems superfluous in its very existence.
When this many New York dudes are waiting on line, it’s not for salad: it’s to fill that universal fried-chicken need.
 
