Neerob
Indian
2109 Starling Avenue,
718-904-7061
GOOD Bangladeshi cooking is hard to come by in New York. Though “Bangladesh” is stamped on many menus, too often these are passports to food from other parts of the subcontinent. The longtime touchstone, Spicy Mina, in Woodside, Queens, went dark last year, supplanted by a Nepali spot that also turns out pizza.
One place that lovers of the cuisine have turned to is Parkchester in the Bronx, where Mohammed Rahman owns Neerob. It is on a low-rise stretch of Starling Avenue that is home to numerous Bangladeshi-owned businesses. His modest, sunny establishment serves as a de facto social center, partly for the genial atmosphere — all the customers seem to know Mr. Rahman by his nickname, Khokon — but principally for the food.
Mustard oil hums through Bangladeshi dishes like low-wattage horseradish and yet — at least as prepared by the chef, Mohammed Islam — it does not add an oily texture. Fish is the favorite protein, and garlic, turmeric, chiles and cumin power many dishes. Side plates provide a last-minute zing from more chiles, or whole cilantro or raw onion or lime.
Neerob’s offerings change daily, so the paper menu is an unreliable guide; a whiteboard is timelier but not illuminating. Best to survey the multihued (but unlabeled) steam-table display and deal directly with the servers. Bengali is the lingua franca, but you can manage in English.
Look first for Neerob’s exceptional bhartas ($4 each). Literally “mashed” dishes, they typically feature vegetables like spinach, potato and eggplant, perhaps in partnership with fish or shrimp. Four or five bhartas are available each day, and it’s perfectly acceptable to order a $1 dollop of each. Many other portions and prices are equally fungible. Sharing moderates the tab and adds to the enjoyment.
A party of two, for example, might sample all the available bhartas and split an order of dal ($3), soupy yellow lentils bright with cumin, ginger and garlic, to spoon over their plates of rice. Two or three shared plates of fish, vegetables or meat — each, traditionally, added to its own pristine patch of rice — round out a meal.
The featured items in Neerob’s fish dishes ($5 to $10) are imported and, often, inscrutable. Most are also delicious, especially ilish, pan-fried with onions and chiles; the bony, oil-rich flesh resembles shad. Small catfish called tangra, in a thin red curry, seem almost boneless; the pale mild flesh pulls away easily from the spine. Minnowlike keski are served in a tomato-and-onion sauce vibrant with finger-staining turmeric; they can be gobbled whole.
Vegetable dishes ($3 to $4) are more readily identifiable. Anything with spinach is good, particularly alu palang, mildly spiced and mixed with potato. Eggplant, long beans, cabbage and kidney beans appear frequently, in various guises — again, sometimes in combination with fish. Ask, too, after kochur loti, pale green taro shoots sautéed with olives.
A rotating roster of meaty curries features chicken, beef or goat ($5 to $6). Less adventurous eaters might fall back on creamy, pinkish chicken tikka masala ($6), a scarlet leg of chicken tandoori ($2.50), perhaps the biriyani of the day ($7 to $9). The vegetable fritters called pakoras (three for $1) are delightful when fresh; so are overstuffed fried samosas ($1 each).
Since Neerob is halal, no alcohol is permitted on the premises. Parched throats turn to the omnipresent mango lassi ($3), soda ($1) and aromatic milk tea ($1).
Unlike many restaurants of its size, Neerob makes desserts in-house. They include cardamom-scented kheer ($3), or rice pudding; gulab jamun, uncommonly light deep-fried dough balls in thin syrup ($5); and a favorite Bengali sweet, shandesh ($5), fresh cheese sweetened with date palm sugar and molded into moist discs. These are stacked in a refrigerator, but check the counter first; a fresh batch might be within easy reach.
 
2109 Starling Avenue (Olmstead Avenue), Parkchester, Bronx; (718) 904-7061; 
.
 Fish dishes, pakoras (vegetable fritters), bhartas (mashed dishes), shandesh (cheese sweetened with date palm sugar).
 $1 to $10.
 MasterCard, Visa and Discover.
 8 a.m. to 11:30 p.m., daily.
 Dining room is accessible; restroom is not.
 Yes.
