Rye
American, Bistros, New American
247 South First Street,
718-218-8047
AMBIGUITY and misdirection work well in novels and movies, heightening suspense and sparking the imagination. But in restaurants? They’re mostly handmaidens to frustration, a state of mind that Rye, which opened in coy stages in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, over the last two and a half months, seems rigged to foster.
It’s a somewhat confused and confusing enterprise, starting with the location, just far enough off any main artery to recommend some clear, possibly ostentatious signage. Rye spurns that recommendation. Unmarked, it blends into the nondescript buildings around it, easily overlooked by someone walking at a brisk clip.
That’s fair enough and even fun —  part of a rich tradition, captured in recent years by Manhattan hideaways like Freemans and La Esquina, of restaurants playing curiosity-piquing games of hide-and-seek. And in Rye’s case, the game fits in with the restaurant’s broader evocation of a Prohibition-era speakeasy.
But the confusion doesn’t stop at the ill-advertised entrance. Maybe because Rye hasn’t quite worked out what it really wants to be, it confronts you with too many riddles, complicating your effort to plot a coherent experience and undercutting its considerable sexiness and charms. Although it’s a restaurant worth knowing about, it’s not as  simply and easily navigable as it should be.
Much of its menu promises fine dining of a relatively tame, buttoned-down sort: a beet salad with micro arugula and goat cheese; duck confit with wild mushrooms; pan-roasted halibut with haricots verts and sugar snaps; roasted chicken with spring vegetables.
But a disappointingly succinct list of wines  suggests that, alternately, the real point of Rye is its cocktails, some of which come with the currently fashionable allotment of one large cube  of ice, all of which can be savored at a long, gorgeous mahogany bar that visually dominates the dining room.
To that end there is, wisely, a menu category for snacks. Only here, too, nothing is quite what it appears to be. The sliders — one made with pork belly, another with short rib — are in fact closer to full-fledged sandwiches. And a meatloaf sandwich listed with them is a snack the way Godzilla is a garden lizard.
A “grill” category on the menu exists apart from categories for appetizers and entrees, where dishes are described in full, and it includes no detail whatsoever about the items it comprises. Does that mean the duck breast and hanger steak in this niche are merely grilled pieces of meat?
No. These, too, are fully composed dishes — the duck, for example, is arranged around a hillock of couscous — and the server recites the unwritten details of them, but only if you happen to ask. The server also has to tell you which “grill” items are portioned as starters and which qualify as main courses, because they’re not presented in any particular order.
Beyond these bits of mild nonsense and odd affectation are real merit and considerable merriment.  Rye’s owner is the chef Cal Elliott, whose contribution to the Williamsburg culinary scene has been significant. He cooked at Dumont and was one of the two chefs in charge of the kitchen at Dressler when it opened in 2006.
He fashioned Rye from what had been a bodega, though you probably wouldn’t guess that. The dark woodwork and pressed tin ceiling  look like lovingly restored, freshly gleaming holdovers from some pub-brasserie hybrid going back decades. When the room is sufficiently crowded, it has a lived-in, age-softened feel.
And when Mr. Elliott hits his mark, the cooking appealingly complements that atmosphere. It’s mostly a mix of bistro stalwarts and of-the-moment comfort foods like a side of macaroni and cheese, the non-slider sliders and the meatloaf sandwich, wet and wild enough to qualify as a sloppy Joe — an enormous,  fantastic one at that. The mix of meats in its crunchy embrace included beef, veal, duck and pork.
A salad of house-smoked sturgeon, frisée, potatoes, pancetta and horseradish had enough flavor and zing for two or three dishes, concentrated here in one hugely satisfying appetizer.
Just as satisfying was an appetizer-size portion of pork belly. At many restaurants, pork belly is soft through and through; at Rye, the slices of it came off the grill with crisp edges that provided a wicked contrast to the luscious middle.
While the pork was thickly marbled with fat, the grilled duck breast was only thinly skirted with it: the right call. And it was expertly cooked, though that wasn’t true of everything. Rye needs to be more consistent.
A rib-eye in a dark sauce inspired by beef Bourguignon was tender and juicy one visit, tough the next. A floppy helter-skelter assemblage of noodles, cheese and wild mushrooms that was being called lasagna should be renamed or, better yet, re-imagined. It was 
wet and wild.
The selection of desserts is strictly limited, but who cares when the doughnuts (more like doughnut holes, really) are this warm and crunchy? And when there’s a cordial as excellent as a vaguely orange-flavored mix of rye and espresso showcased here?
Sipping it slowly during the last of a string of visits to Rye, I still couldn’t decide whether this restaurant was positioned to be, and best approached as,  a drinkers’ refuge with ambitious food or a proper restaurant with a particular vanity about its cocktails. I sensed some indecision and tentativeness — reflected, too, in Rye’s unusually extended “soft opening.”
Maybe that’s a function of the neighborhood, whose hipsters are aging and being joined by more settled, stodgy types. Late last year that evolution produced Walter Foods, another largely grown-up, seriously handsome restaurant trying like Rye to balance formal and cheeky impulses. Neither place has mastered that trick, though Rye’ s divinely messy meatloaf sandwich will tug you, for a few minutes, past the point of caring — or for that matter even noticing.
★
247 South First Street (Roebling Street), Williamsburg, Brooklyn; (718) 218-8047. 
A turn-of-the-century structure houses a two-section dining room, one with a gorgeous mahogany bar, that brims with vintage touches and evokes a speakeasy.
 Moderately loud.
 Short rib and pork belly sliders; meatloaf sandwich; grilled pork belly; smoked sturgeon salad; grilled duck breast; roasted chicken; doughnuts.
 Serviceable but succinct, with a median price a bit too high; the focus is as much on cocktails.
 Appetizers, $5 to $16. Entrees, $16 to $28. Desserts, $7 to $9. 
From 6 to midnight Tuesday to Saturday and to 11 p.m. Sunday. Open Monday for drinks but not dinner.
Accepted only for parties of six or more.
 Visa and MasterCard.
 Entrance and entire restaurant on street level; accessible restrooms.
 Ratings range from zero to four stars and reflect the reviewer’s reaction to food, ambience and service, with price taken into consideration. Menu listings and prices are subject to change.
