L'Artusi
Italian
228 West 10th Street,
212-255-5757
ALMOST everything you need to know about the confidence that dell’Anima instilled in Gabe Thompson is written large, or rather loopy, in the vitello tonnato at his follow-up restaurant, L’Artusi, which opened to instant popularity three months ago.
It’s the kind of dish that only a chef feeling a surge of confidence would come up with. It’s not vitello tonnato per se  — on the menu, those two words have telltale, caveat emptor quotation marks around them  — but an homage and improvisation, which in its case means an insult.
In place of the tuna-infused mayonnaise of sorts that typically coats the veal, Mr. Thompson tops the meat with scattered dices of tuna so small they’re almost guaranteed not to make any impression. They’re joined by the yolks of quail eggs, which produce a sticky texture instead of the usual creamy one.
As for the veal, it was pounded so thin when I had it that I could have read a Bumble Bee label through it, and it adhered like wet tissue paper to the plate. Its texture was off-putting; its taste, sadly muted.
Dell’Anima (“of the soul”) opened in a modest space in the West Village in 2007 and has been packed ever since, its appeal attributable in large part to its intimacy, its seating arrangement (many high chairs at tall tables and counters), its wines, and a savory, hip analogue to the make-your-own sundae: the make-your-own bruschetta. You get to choose your toppings and spread them yourself.
At L’Artusi, named for a renowned Italian cookbook writer, Mr. Thompson and his business partner, Joe Campanale, have moved well beyond the bruschetta. They have gone not only bigger  — with nearly 115 seats, L’Artusi is more than twice the size of dell’Anima  — but also bolder, and the uneven results are a lesson in overextension.
If they turned a more skeptical eye to some of Mr. Thompson’s inventions, edited the menu to about two-thirds its current length and focused harder on the execution of what remained, they’d have an excellent restaurant. As it is, they have a fitfully enjoyable one.
You can have a terrific time. Among nearly 10 pasta or pastalike dishes, which inhabit the strongest of the menu’s many sections, there are several  —  garganelli with a meaty lamb ragù; orecchiette with house-made sausage and bitter greens  —  that I yearn to eat again.
What’s more, the restaurant has a charm  —  a buoyancy, really  —  that frequently papers over the food’s shortcomings.
At some places the ebullience of the owners, managers and principal servers is palpable, putting you in a happy mood the minute you make contact with it. I’ve encountered some of that spirit at dell’Anima; L’Artusi positively brims with it. You can feel how much the players want you to have a good time.
They also want you to be comfortable in a way that’s not as possible at dell’Anima, given its dimensions. They’ve furnished two floors of space previously occupied by the restaurant Maremma with pretty, padded seats, including some of the most comfortable bar stools I’ve encountered. All in all, there are nearly 30 stools at different counters.
L’Artusi’s selling points extend to the wide-ranging, pleasantly surprising Italian wine list that Mr. Campanale put together and that Aaron Sherman, who worked at WD-50, helps guide you through. When was the last time you spotted a 1996 soave? L’Artusi had one, for $62, with the slightly nutty, racy personality I love in aged, oxidized whites.
Most of the desserts by the pastry chef Katherine Lahr, who is married to Mr. Thompson, are first-rate. Her coconut semifreddo was beautifully realized, at once silky and dense.
Texture is one of her strong suits, as she also demonstrated with a crème fraîche mousse  — similar to whipped cream, but with a touch more weight  — that accompanied a superb olive oil cake.
And she mingles flavors astutely, accessorizing a vanilla-buttermilk panna cotta with pineapple sorbet and macadamia nuts.
Ms. Lahr had only one miss, a dry walnut cake, while Mr. Thompson had many. It’s a puzzling show he puts on, caroming from success to failure and back again.
His menu of mostly small- and medium-size plates is divided into crudo, a few salads, pastas, fish, meat and sides. Focusing on salads, pastas and sides increases your odds of satisfaction, though a few dishes in the pasta section  — specifically the gnudi and the gnocchi  — suffer from Mr. Thompson’s sometimes reckless hand with butter.
He doesn’t grasp the nuances of excess as well as a Mario Batali or a Michael White  — doesn’t fully understand what’s splendid decadence and what’s just overkill.
In general he’s indiscreet with salt, though you never know. During one meal, a side of crispy potatoes had just the right amount of it, while the similarly crispy potatoes alongside juicy slices of hanger steak were so salty they had me lunging for my water glass.
The seasoning of some other dishes was also out of whack. Citrusy notes came on too strong in both sea scallop crudo and escolar ceviche. An entree of grilled quail had been splashed with an oppressive measure of red-wine vinegar.
There were dishes that read more intriguing than they tasted. Oxtail calzone? It was like an elongated pot pie on a sludgy swish of béchamel. Wagyu tongue with cabbage and rye? A messy Jewish-deli mishap.
But Mr. Thompson plays happier games as well. Rye crisps lent an unexpected ping and crunch to his beef carpaccio, which was the vitello tonnato’s more practical, presentable sibling.
Pineapple and chilies combined to festive effect in fluke crudo, and chilies were used to fine, measured purpose in the orecchiette, in the garganelli and in squid-ink trofie with a calamari ragù.
For a less zippy, blunter pasta dish that sticks to the gut in the best way, try the pizzoccheri, made with layers of buckwheat noodles, brussels sprouts, potato and melted fontina.
This combined with some wine and a bar stool would make for a perfect impromptu, abbreviated meal. But then you’d be using L’Artusi the way so many regulars use dell’Anima, and I think Mr. Thompson had higher hopes.
*
228 West 10th Street (Bleecker Street), Greenwich Village; (212) 255-5757. 
Two spacious levels with padded bar stools, banquette and open kitchen downstairs; more serene upstairs.
 Moderately loud.
 Fluke crudo; grapefruit salad; cavatelli; pizzoccheri; garganelli with lamb ragù; testa cappelacci; orecchiette with sausage; sweetbreads; olive oil cake; vanilla-buttermilk panna cotta; pear crostata.
 Almost all Italian and thrillingly diverse. A greater selection of accessibly priced whites than of reds. Separate short appendix of New York State wines.
 Crudo selections and salads, $10 to $14; pasta dishes, $15 to $18; small and medium-size fish and meat dishes, $10 to $26; desserts, $10.
From 5:30 to 11 p.m. Sunday through Thursday, to midnight Friday and Saturday.
For prime times call at least 10 days ahead.
 All major cards.
 Entrance, and lower of two dining and accessible restroom all at street level.
 Ratings range from zero to four stars and reflect the reviewer’s reaction to food, ambience and service, with price taken into consideration. Menu listings and prices are subject to change.
