Gottscheer Hall Tap Room
German
657 Fairview Avenue,
718-366-3030
GOOD spirits make for rousing dinners, but on the evening of the annual Jaegerball,  they nearly crowded out our kassler rippchen and baked spaetzle. The local rod and gun club, joined by hundreds of friends and family, had assembled for dinner and dancing in the main ballroom of Gottscheer Hall. But many lingered in the public taproom, clustering near the television — and nearly screening off the server from our table — to follow football.
Most nights in Ridgewood, Queens, the Gottscheers (got-SHAY-ers) are fewer, and mellower. The hall was dedicated in the 1920s by immigrants from Gottschee — once an enclave within Austria-Hungary, now part of Slovenia — and revitalized with another wave, displaced by World War II. The surviving members of that later generation are advanced in years, and their adult children usually speak in long-settled New York accents rather than the Bavarian dialect called Gottscheerish.
But the hall’s taproom menu — open to all comers for several years, and since 2010 in the hands of the chef Eric Acklowitz — retains an old-country accent.
You can eat well without eating heavy. My first meal was a link of krainerwurst ($5.50), a hot-smoked beef-and-pork sausage, cradled in a slice of rye and topped with house-made sauerkraut — not the stuff of stadium dogs, but a gentler version cooked with onion, bacon, apple and white wine. That accompaniment dresses a crisp schnitzel sandwich (chicken or pork, $6.50), too.
Like the rest of the menu, these can be enjoyed at the bar or an outlying table. Wherever you sit, your waiter and bartender will likely be one and the same, and amiable conversation may call to you from across the room.
The selection of soups ($3.75 to $5) changes day to day. Best is Italian wedding soup, a mélange of veal and pork mini-meatballs, spinach and wisps of egg, in chicken broth. A crock of 
-crusted three-onion soup is always available; it might remind you of its French cousin, except for the note of caraway.
Most main dishes reside in comfort-food territory, especially the deep brown beef goulash ($11.75), twinned with a particularly lissome species of the egg noodles called spaetzle. Thin slices of long-marinated sauerbraten are braced by red cabbage; kassler rippchen ($13 single, $18 double), sided with sauerkraut, imparts a smoky flavor to one pork chop, or two. The sauerbraten and kassler rippchen are also accompanied by potato pancakes; though well-fried, they’re sometimes dense.
Thursday brings a generous if workaday prime rib special ($20, with soup and dessert). Also weighty is baked spaetzle ($8), laden with Cheddar, Swiss, Parmesan and asiago on a béchamel base. The house macaroni and cheese is ideally shared, unless you’re laying a broad foundation for an evening of drink.
This is a taproom, after all, though the taps are few, and the more potent potables, very familiar. (There’s nary a craft cocktail, but I smiled to hear the word “buyback.”) Amid well-known German brews, you’ll also find a pair of Austrians: Gösser, on draft, and Steigl, a hoppy pilsner, by the bottle.
For the duration of the winter, there’s gluhwein ($3), too. This warmed spiced beverage is typically prepared with red wine, but here every other batch is made with white. The result is lighter, fragrant.
Two house-made desserts stand out among a rotating selection of cakes and pies (some of them brought in). The more evocative name belongs to palatschinken ($6), a pair of sugar-sprinkled soft crepes rolled around grape jelly or orange marmalade. Bread pudding ($5) sounds prosaic, till it arrives draped in a warm veil of rum raisin sauce. Within, you may detect hints of vanilla bean, lemon zest and Grand Marnier.
You may also observe a broad leather belt holding tiny bottles of Underberg — the bitter digestif and settler of upset stomachs — hanging behind the bar. On my very first visit I counted six bottles; months later, they remain untouched.
 
657 Fairview Avenue (Gates Avenue), Ridgewood, Queens, (718) 366-3030, 
.
 Italian wedding soup, krainerwurst, goulash with spaetzle, sauerbraten, kassler rippchen, bread pudding.
 $4 to $20.
 Discover, MasterCard, Visa.
 Dinner, Wednesday to Saturday only, 5 to 10 p.m.
 Yes, through rear entrance.
 No.
