Lhasa Fast Food
Tibetan
37-50 74th Street, Suite 3750,
347-952-6934
In the middle of lunch at Lhasa Fast Food, someone started blowing a sacred conch. I peered down the hall. Next door, a jeweler was pressing his lips to a shell half-sheathed in silver.
Lhasa Fast Food was once just a counter at the back of a cellphone store in Jackson Heights, Queens, where pint tubs of Tibetan hot sauce were sold alongside iPads and Bollywood DVDs. There was no sign out front. Pilgrims came nevertheless, ardent momo hunters who generously shared the secret online.
Two years ago, the store was truncated, its back half subdivided into little shops. Now the restaurant has its own door, at the end of a narrow corridor flanked by jewelers, and its name posted outside, under a neon “Open” sign with the snow lions and blue and red sun rays of the Tibetan flag.
Step inside and it’s choose your own adventure: haircut to the left, fuchsia luggage downstairs or, to the right, cellphone tassels and strings of prayer flags that lead at last to Lhasa Fast Food.
For some diners, the more tortuous the journey, the more miraculous the meal. But the cooking here would be worth seeking out even if it were served in a sleek food hall in Midtown Manhattan.
Here, for $7, is a caldron of dusk: thenthuk, a Tibetan soup tinged by crushed tomatoes, a scrum of chiles and ginger releasing its muted sweetness. Scraps of noodles bob on top, torn by hand, each no longer than a thumb. They are chewy and dense, the opposite of the lithe bean thread noodles tangling below.
Ping-sha is darker and redder, the color both a lure and a warning, with a swiftly blooming heat. Half-moons of potato and tofu drink up the furious broth. Like thenthuk, it’s heavy with hanks of beef and dried wood-ear mushrooms sprung back to life and surprisingly tender.
In both soups, the underlying hum is yerma, the Tibetan name for Sichuan peppercorn, native to the Tibetan plateau and making a pin cushion of the tongue. Gyathuk is calmer, with lo mein in the depths, a weave of ground beef and crunchy strips of radish, and whole spinach leaves dunked in late so they taste still fresh.
Sang Jien Ben, 40, the owner and chef, grew up in the Tibetan town of Rebkong in what is today Qinghai Province, China. Historically, this is part of the Tibetan region of Amdo, birthplace of the 14th Dalai Lama, whose portrait, draped in a saffron khata (ceremonial scarf) and set against a backdrop of holy Mount Kailash, looks gently down on diners here.
The wood above the counter has been painted to look like the carved eave of a traditional Tibetan house. On the salmon-pink wall, framed sermons — “Meditation on Dying,” “The Paradox of Our Life” — warn against “tall men but short characters.”
My favorite dishes were the most forceful: thin panes of beef under a stain of chile and soy, with visible trails of Sichuan peppercorns; cold noodles and minced beef shining with sesame oil and haunted by the souls of pulverized chiles.
Mr. Ben makes laphing — listed on the English menu as liang fen, its more familiar Chinese name — by kneading and squeezing the gluten out of barley flour, then steaming it in sheets. It comes cut into noodles, streaked with black vinegar, sesame oil, soy and a house-made chile oil that nearly brought me to my knees. (In a more whimsical version that Mr. Ben calls “sushi,” the noodles are coiled up with daubs of chile oil trapped at the center, like inflamed hearts.)
On the counter stands a clay sculpture spray-painted to look like a snowy mountain, capped by a once-golden, now-tarnished momo: a trophy from the 2014 Momo Crawl, a tour of local Himalayan restaurants organized by Jeff Orlick, a Queens resident. The momo is supposed to spin, but the batteries died long ago.
No matter, for the real momos are as big as ever, looking ready to burst their pleats. Packed eight to a basket, the dumplings are stuffed with beef crazed with juices and bright stitches of cilantro, or simply chives, startlingly green and tempered with nothing more than salt. When I lifted the lid, the steam didn’t rise — it flew up, and all the faces at my table turned damp, as if passing through fog.
