Phil-Am Kusina
Philippine
556 Tompkins Avenue,
718-727-3663
It is 25 years and less than a half-block from Phil-Am Foods, the grocery where Manny Imperial started working at age 5, to 
, the restaurant he runs now.
He grew up here, on the North Shore of Staten Island, home to many of the borough’s more than 5,000 residents of Filipino descent. His parents, Felix and Teresita (known as Titatita), kept a calamansi tree in their sunroom, freezing the fruit to make it last the winter.
They still watch over the grocery, a branch of the 
 chain that started in New Jersey, whose owners are family on Ms. Imperial’s side. There, after graduating from Baruch College in Manhattan, their son learned to cook, filling plastic bins with traditional Filipino dishes like ginataang laing, taro leaves relaxed in coconut milk; and dinuguan, pig’s blood stew.
There is no trace of pig’s blood, at least none that I could detect, at Phil-Am Kusina, which opened in 2014 in a one-story building attached to a Christian ministry, a space haunted by shuttered Filipino restaurants past.
Peach and khaki-green walls rise up to a peaked roof. Tables are shielded with glass wrapped in butcher paper and half-lit by votive candles tucked into Capiz-shell lotus blossoms. There is that sense of expanse possible only at a distance from Manhattan, and of evenings brought to an early close.
The menu is at once grander and more circumspect than the grocery’s, reassuring to those unfamiliar with the cuisine. Classic adobo is applied to chicken wings; appetizers are a roll call from the fryer, best among them loose fritters of shrimp, carrots and bean sprouts like crispy question marks.
“Tacos” are really deep-fried cups with a bubbled won ton texture and the ruched edges of a giant clamshell. They spill over with a hash of chicken thigh and onions sloshed, sisig-style, with lemon and soy — although not enough of the lemon and too much of the soy. (And in the Philippines, some chicken liver and maybe a little heart would be thrown in.)
But here, too, is chicharon bulaklak, defined on the menu by the somewhat clinical term “mesentery.” This refers to the folds of membrane that connect the intestines to the abdomen. More romantically, in Tagalog, bulaklak translates as flower, although the ruffled edges of the fat suggest something more like a garter.
Portions are generous, prices kind. Nothing ventures above $16, and for that you get humba, a whole pig’s leg that looks as if it were wrested from a beast whose steps once shook the earth. The meat gives and gives. Too bad it’s over-slaked with pineapple juice and brown sugar, caramelized only to the point of sweetness, not complexity.
Never mind: For $10 there is the revelation of kaldereta, a dark tomato stew originally taken from the Spanish and improved with liver pâté, the faint mineral tang like kissing a coin before it’s tossed. Kaldereta can be made with beef, but why, when you could have goat shank, braised beyond resistance alongside manzanilla olives, for deepening notes of sourness and brine? It was the first plate emptied at my table, and quickly.
Bicol Express comes from the region in southeast Luzon where Mr. Imperial’s father was born. This is as close as the Philippines gets to curry, with pork belly — here deep-fried first — veiled in a sauce of coconut milk needled with long green chiles. The crucial ingredient is bagoong, fermented baby shrimp that tastes like a distillate of the ocean.
Other dishes could have used such boldness. Sisig pusit, grilled loops and tentacles of squid, arrived swamped in soy on a silent skillet that should have sizzled. Sinigang, a soup whose defining note is tamarind, barely raised a pucker. Almost everything needed adjusting with bagoong, particularly kare-kare, a peanut-butter stew that tasted of little else.
If the cooking at Phil-Am Kusina is sometimes distracted, that may be because Mr. Imperial is busy these days; he also manages his parents’ grocery store, and this year started a food truck called 
, currently stationed in Gowanus, Brooklyn, and offering the likes of lechon sliders and longanisa sausage “mini dogs,” for delivery only.
But I’m still thinking of that kaldereta and crispy Bicol, of young coconut meat eaten out of the shell; of a glass of calamansi juice, sharp and bright. Here’s hoping that Mr. Imperial can find a little more time in the kitchen.
