El Molcajete
Mexican
1506-08 Westchester Avenue,
917-688-1433
At El Molcajete, the tacos look like bouquets, brimming with cilantro, loosely bundled in paper sleeves twisted tight at one end and gaping at the mouth. They are heavy with meat: hanks of shredded barbacoa, dark and caramelly cecina, cabeza more a stage of melt than flesh.
Then there is suadero, a cut of beef often likened to brisket but closer to the udder, almost as fatty as pork belly and, when braised just shy of eternity, just as yielding. The first mouthful is like biting into a peach in July. It tastes of peak ripeness, of juices that can’t wait to run, of it-couldn’t-get-better-than-this.
El Molcajete stands a few steps from the elevated Elder Avenue station in Soundview, the Bronx, less than a half-hour’s ride from the Upper East Side. (Don’t be misled by the map on its Yelp listing, which would take you six stations east to Westchester Square.) From downtown Manhattan, it’s not much farther than the late-night taco trucks on Roosevelt Avenue in Queens or the taquerias of Bushwick and Sunset Park, Brooklyn, and as serious a destination.
Tucked next to a Little Caesars and across from a Mega 99-cent store, the restaurant is humble but no hole in the wall. The square dining room is painted half-orange and equipped with two flat-screen TVs, tuned to telenovelas or fútbol, and a long bar with padded stools and a hoard of tequila. The liquor makes its way into gasoline-strength margaritas rimmed with a lime salt so candylike, my companions were convinced it was Sour Patch powder.
Tacos can barely hold their chubby fistfuls of meat. (Eat two, at $3 each, and you may be finished.) They crowd the plate, the meat ready to tumble out of its swaddling tortillas, which are neatly doubled and toasted just enough to give off a whiff of corn. There is barely room for the accompanying crescents of lime, rosy-hearted radishes and cebollitas (spring onions) with charred stalks and split bulbs.
Elsewhere on the table are salsas, red and green, the first quick-tempered, the second with a slow-rising ire. They are good, but the tacos don’t need them, or anything more than cilantro and gleams of white onion.
On each visit, mid-meal, I had trouble keeping my allegiances straight. One night those beautiful shambles of suadero were briefly demoted in favor of cabeza (beef head, primarily cheek and jowl), which elsewhere I’ve found overly unctuous but here is simply and astonishingly lush.
Then the honor went to cecina, cured and dried beef teased back into succulence on the grill and sweating out its salts. But how could I stay true to that when next in line was barbacoa, roasted goat, structured yet tender and distinctly animal, its mineral tinge like a memory of blood.
I was less enthralled by lengua (tongue), although those who love its stubborn texture will appreciate this forthright version. Oreja (pig’s ear) was deep-fried and brittle, all chewiness banished; I may as well have been eating rings of batter, with half-disintegrated rubber bands at the center.
These were outliers. A meal at El Molcajete could happily begin and end with tacos. Still, the encyclopedic menu has other worthies, like alambres, which call to mind nachos with strips of blackened beef in place of chips, under a volcanic aftermath of melted cheese. Gorditas are giants of their kind, masa cakes with rounded bottoms and nearly toppling lids, overstuffed with lettuce, cilantro, tomatoes, crema and, far beneath it all, pork. They reset the palate, so you can keep eating.
More elaborate dishes, listed as the day’s specials, may include huaxmole, a creamy stew of guajillo peppers evoking cranberries and smoke, or a goat consommé with a kindling of chiles. Tostadas de pata are a chillier matter, crispy tortillas strewn with cold cubes of jellied pig’s foot. At first they taste merely congealed and glossy; then, warmed by the tongue, they turn to velvet.
Little English is spoken here, yet somehow no dishes go astray and everything arrives as ordered. Publicity is unsought: The staff declined to answer questions or allow dishes to be photographed for this review. They are cooking for, and serving, the neighborhood.
Lucky neighbors.
