Bobo
American, New American
181 West 10th Street,
212-488-2626
BOBO was like the new kid who showed up on the first day of school in perfectly torn jeans, with a perfectly cocked hip and perfect confidence that the right pose and prettiness were all it took to get by.
Bobo was aloof. It didn’t bother with a sign outside its subterranean front door, an easily overlooked portal to two floors of a century-old town house with exposed brick, an antique piano and hexagonal bookshelves filled with Bellow and bric-a-brac. Admirers would find their way. Insiders would get the word.
Bobo was self-impressed. How else to interpret its affected groaner of a name? If you asked what it meant, you were told that it was shorthand for the confluence of bohemian spirit and bourgeois success. And you winced, especially if you learned as well that the restaurant’s owner, Carlos Suarez, had dubbed its energy-efficient, recycling-sensitive ethos “coco,” for “collective conscious.”
With food that yo-yoed between so-so and no-no, Bobo wasn’t earning the right to this much semantic cuteness, which it seemed to be bungling to boot. Conscious or 
? You had to wonder.
And you had to pause when the phone was answered “Bobo residence,” as it often was, and debate whether to make a reservation or, in the spirit of playing along, ask for Mrs. Bobo, making clear that Mr. Bobo would do in a pinch.
But beneath all that nonsense, it turned out,  was a restaurant that cared about more than buzz and size 0 regulars  — that wanted, and was willing to work for, respect.
Before it was four months old, Mr. Suarez dismissed his first, poorly reviewed executive chef and got a new one. Seven months after that, he nudged that new chef aside to make room for a culinary star in Boston who was willing to make a move to Manhattan.
That star, Patrick Connolly, from the restaurant Radius, has been in charge since mid-August. And he’s given Bobo  something more than its looks to be vain about.
In fact a few of his dishes  —  his appetizers, at least  — manage to steal attention from the votive candles lining the dark, narrow  staircase up to the main dining room and that room’s droopy lighting fixtures, which bring to mind gargantuan glass 
.
The Maine crab, for example. Mr. Connolly compensates for how wispy and insubstantial strands of sweet, delicate crab meat can be by stacking them into what looks like a cupcake,  and more or less icing it with cashew butter, which does the unctuous work that another chef might assign, less imaginatively, to avocado. Fried capers cut the richness.
Avocado makes its predictable appearance with raw ruby-colored tuna, but even in this safest of starters Mr. Connolly shows some creativity. Each wedge of ahi tuna is on its own thick, crisp cucumber slice, the avocado a subtle purée between them. On top of the tuna, snapping everything to life, are sprigs of cilantro.
The pork belly also stands out, another appetizer staple given a treatment that’s not routine. The belly, cut into strips, is interlaced with similar size strips of crackling, which just barely crest the surface of a lemon grass broth. With its citrusy spark, the broth makes an appealing foil for the fatty pork.
All of these dishes demonstrate Mr. Connolly’s fine sense of balance when it comes to flavors and textures. The capers, cracklings and cucumbers all take what could approximate baby food and require you to bring some teeth to the party.
And the tuna and pork appetizers speak to Mr. Connolly’s fondness for Asian inflections, an affinity that distinguishes his Bobo from the Bobo of his predecessors, who gave it a more steadfastly Mediterranean personality.
But what carries over from previous incarnations of Bobo is a sense of caution, a feeling that the menu is driven too much by what diners on automatic pilot expect and too little by real inspiration. Sea trout (standing in for salmon), monkfish, chicken breast, a pork chop, a rib-eye: the array of entrees is entirely unsurprising.
The cooking during my visits was often impressive, epitomized by the tenderness of that chicken breast  — served in thick petals with artichokes, mushrooms and a garlic and parsley sauce  — and by the crunchy-gooey contrast between the outside and inside of breaded, deep-fried veal sweetbreads, a preparation reminiscent of the restaurant Prune’s but even better.
But seared daurade, served with ginger butter in a miso consommé, was slightly overdone, as was the pork chop one of the two times I tried it.
And a gnocchi entree, arrestingly large in portion, was arrestingly bland in taste, its claims of sage and Parmesan notwithstanding.
Bobo had some consistency problems that didn’t go away with dessert. One night the 
 mousse was cold and hard, as if it were a semifreddo that had been mislabeled on the menu. On a subsequent night it was creamy, silky: the mousse it had pledged to be.
The best dessert was the yogurt and mascarpone “cheesecake,” presented in the manner not of a cake but of a custard, with a Concord grape glaze on top and, buried within, fried salted pumpkin seeds.
At Bobo there’s thought and ambition and there are good intentions, reflected in a list of special cocktails less hackneyed than many others and evident in a less expensive “den menu” developed for the tables around the long bar on the lower of the two comely levels.
But Bobo hasn’t wholly surrendered its attitude and put service before sheen.
Interested in a red Burgundy, I ordered one for $69, well below the average for  bottles on Bobo’s excessively expensive wine list.
The server said the restaurant was out of it, but offered to suggest another.
“Let me guess,” I said, and pointed to a $62 bottle, the only similarly priced Burgundy.
No, he said, explaining the restaurant was out of 
, too. But “for a few dollars more,” he said, an even lovelier Burgundy could be ours.
It cost $115. And Bobo didn’t do what another restaurant might have and offer, in light of the unavailability of cheaper Burgundies, to reduce that amount.
Maybe the right kind of diner doesn’t sweat a price difference like that.   But at times like this, I found myself wishing that Bobo was a little less bourgeois and a little more bohemian.
*
181 West 10th Street (West Fourth Street), Greenwich Village; (212) 488-2626. 
Across two floors of a century-old town house, décor meant to evoke some bourgeois bohemian’s dinner party.
 Loud.
 Crab with cashew butter; sweetbreads with lentils; pork belly with lemon grass; ahi tuna; duck with date purée; chicken breast; “cheesecake”; plum-huckleberry crisp.
 Widely varied, European and expensive.
 Dinner appetizers, $10 to $18; entrees, $19 to $30; desserts, $10 to $12. Less expensive “den menu” also available on first floor.
Dinner from 6 to 11 p.m. Sunday through Wednesday and to midnight Thursday through Saturday. Brunch from noon to 4 p.m. Saturday and Sunday.
Call at least three weeks ahead for prime times. Downstairs tables for walk-ins.
 All major cards.
 Inaccessible.
 Ratings range from zero to four stars and reflect the reviewer’s reaction to food, ambience and service, with price taken into consideration. Menu listings and prices are subject to change.
