Dizengoff
Middle Eastern
75 Ninth Avenue,
646-833-7097
Here is pita as it’s meant to be, just shoveled from the oven, with pocks of scorch and loose blackened flour coming off on fingertips, leaving a dusty spoor on sleeves.
At 
, a hummus stand that opened in May in Chelsea Market, this glory is achieved not in a traditional wood-fired clay taboon but in a gas oven built for pizza. The chef, Emily Seaman, has to be patient. Every morning she throws the first dozen loaves away. “They don’t have the right finish,” she said.
The ones that pass muster are fantastically swollen and chewy at the edges, as if air were their most important ingredient.
The first iteration of Dizengoff (DEE-zen-goff), named after a boulevard in Tel Aviv that was once the heart of the city’s bohemian culture, opened in Philadelphia two years ago. It’s an informal side project from 
 and Steven Cook, who run the acclaimed restaurant 
, where Ms. Seaman, a Smith College graduate with a degree in government and German, learned to cook Israeli food.
The Manhattan outpost has stools at a glossy lipstick-red counter, mirror tiles and a collage of street-party and fashion-fair posters in Hebrew. Yellow cans of Osem brand Mediterranean pickles line the shelves.
Lunch is a siege. Hummus has been around for centuries, but everyone seems to want it now, or at least Dizengoff’s meticulous and much-lauded version of it.
It starts with chickpeas, steeped overnight, brought to a rolling boil with a dash of baking soda and left to slow ruination. The resulting mash is mixed with a sauce of small-batch tahini (whose sesame seeds are traceable to a single origin in Ethiopia), garlic, lemon, cumin and salt, each ingredient weighed for precise configuration. The process is repeated every 90 minutes, more often when the hordes get restless.
Served with a slug of olive oil, half-torn parsley and a small sandstorm of paprika, the hummus is very, very good. Is it the best in New York? I may quibble that it’s a little too smooth, almost airbrushed, more in thrall to voluptuousness than earthiness. (My heart still belongs to 
.)
The genius lies in the toppings, several of which are on offer each day, following the seasons and Ms. Seaman’s moods. Recent improvisations include Italian long hot peppers, fried and crushed with coarsely ground hazelnuts, exuding a languorous heat; eggplant, deep-fried and tangy from a night in brine; and ground lamb contoured with fenugreek, paprika and cumin, under shattered almonds.
Most thrilling was cabbage gone louche among cherry tomatoes, garlic and amba, a tart-hot mango pickle with a bitter pang of fenugreek — one of the only ingredients not made in-house. “I’ve tried,” Ms. Seaman said. “I can’t get it to taste right.”
A few toppings have been less inspired, like a bland heap of diced summer squash. Brisket, grown tender without losing integrity from long braising with coffee and guajillo chiles, was smartly paired with pickled Concord grapes, mellow bursts like sips of wine. But the elements acted more like neighbors than partners.
I found a similar disconnect in a few salatim, the Israeli equivalent of mezze, like heirloom melons daubed with olive tapenade or blanched green beans over charred cherry tomatoes — each flavor distinct, but oddly isolated.
To any hummus (from $10 unadorned to $13 with meat), you may add a haminado egg, so called because it harks back to hamin, a Sephardic Sabbath stew put in the oven before sundown, with eggs cooking at low temperature all night. Here the eggs wallow in coffee, mint and onion skins. In the morning Ms. Seaman taps them together to send slivery cracks through the shells, then returns them to the liquid. Once peeled, they reveal dark veins, like marble.
On a busy day, Dizengoff may go through 15 gallons of hummus. At 
, a falafel window steps from the 96th Street subway station on the Upper East Side, it’s a matter of spoonfuls.
“Hummus is delicate,” said Waled Haredy, the chef. He makes only what he knows he will use each day, so the flavor won’t deteriorate in passing back and forth from fridge to counter in the tiny, sweltering kitchen.
Mr. Haredy grew up in Mansoura, in the Nile Delta of Egypt, and came to the United States in 1999 to study aeronautical engineering. He wound up washing vegetables at an Italian restaurant and worked his way up to pasta. In 2011 he opened Habibi’s in Harlem, cooking from his mother’s recipes.
When his landlord raised the rent, he parked a concession truck in an empty lot in Greenwich Village. When a developer bought that lot, he found himself here, in an afterthought of a storefront, 85 square feet, between a brow salon and a smartphone dealer.
He opened Gyro96 in May with Inna Sobel, a real estate broker and longtime friend who helps out at the counter, reassuring customers while they wait. Mr. Haredy makes everything to order, which takes time.
He wanted to serve shawarma, but that requires a bigger kitchen. Instead, he buys a pre-made cone of gyro loaf and brings the meat to life with a quick press on the grill amid a seethe of onion, peppers, cumin and garlic.
For $5, this comes on flatbread from an Egyptian bakery in Queens, livened with spiced vinegar; for $6, over rice stained by turmeric. This is street-cart cheap and delicious, even better folded in with grilled chicken thigh under lashes of tahini sauce and hot sauce charged with paprika, smokier than it is hot.
But falafel is Mr. Haredy’s primary mission. His mother’s recipe, which belonged to her mother and her grandmother before her, uses fava beans with just a touch of chickpeas. He reverses the ratio, but in all else is faithful.
He cautioned that falafel must be eaten immediately, and he’s right: One moment it’s ethereal, the next a lead balloon.
The priciest item on the menu, at $8, is the Rocket, which comes with a childhood memory: When Mr. Haredy grew finicky over his food one day, his father, a strict man from Upper Egypt, the country’s most conservative region, banished him from the table. His mother secretly gave him money and sent him to a nearby falafel shop.
There the owner made him something close to an Israeli sabich, flatbread barely holding in fried eggplant, hard-boiled egg, hummus, pickles, falafel and French fries. This, too, is best eaten on the spot, before the pulse of heat from the fries and falafel, fresh out of the fryer, turns everything damp.
A meal at Dizengoff may end with a lemonnana, a half-frozen slush of piercingly sweet mint lemonade dosed, if you like, with gin, vodka, rum, bourbon or arak. At Gyro96, Mr. Haredy favors the simplicity of karkade, hibiscus iced tea, which he remembers his mother making every day to appease his father’s high blood pressure (and his suspicion of doctors). “That was our Kool-Aid,” Mr. Haredy said.
He brews it as his mother did, soaking dried hibiscus blossoms overnight, then adding a drip of honey to the strained scarlet liquid — just a little, not enough to wholly disguise the flowers’ bitterness.
“That’s how you know it’s medicine,” he said.
