Ellary's Greens
Vegan
33 Carmine Street ,
212-920-5072
“Free detox shots!” the waitress called out as she sashayed through the dining room, a tray of tiny glasses at her shoulder. The liquid in them was jungle green and wobbled. It tasted of kale and salvation, with celery and lemon for a bright-eyed, bushy-tailed finish. I downed it and waited for the world to change.
, which opened in the West Village in April, is not so much a restaurant as dining rehab. Butter and cream are banned from the kitchen. (A lone stick of butter is stowed behind the counter, a concession to those who require a dab on their morning bagel.) The menu, devoted to natural and organic foods, is minutely annotated to distinguish vegan dishes from the merely vegetarian and to announce freedom from dairy and gluten.
From such a place you expect mere nourishment, not pleasure — certainly not the remarkable juiciness of a roasted chicken breast with a crackly veneer and a cushion of celery root purée; nor the intense, creamy mouthful of smoke that is a deviled egg; nor the mashed potatoes, which are doing just fine without butter or cream, buoyant with olive oil and woven with Swiss chard and slivered almonds.
Certainly no restaurant dedicated to the pursuit of health would serve such thick tongues of bacon, cured and smoked in-house and unabashedly fatty. But here they are, a sign that Leith Hill, the owner of Ellary’s Greens (and, at age 50, a first-time restaurateur), is serious about closing the divide between good for you and delicious.
To that end, Ms. Hill has hired 
, a native of Switzerland who has done stints at Raoul’s, Patois and the Hideaway. Most recently, Mr. Oefeli oversaw the prepared-foods department at Whole Foods in TriBeCa. The grocer’s hyper-ecumenical approach is echoed here in the sprawl of the menu and the occasional misguided attempt at non-Western cuisine. (The perplexing “Vietnamese” brown rice noodles barely qualify as Asian.)
His best dishes are modest but vividly detailed: pistachios as crunch (chopped) and cream (pulverized in a Vitamix into an eerily smooth coulis) over pickled beets served in their own brine; brussels sprouts blackened but still firm, with sparks of celery root, orange zest and pecans; trigger snaps of cumin seed in a heap of lentils and slow-roasted carrots. Some forays into the exotic succeed, as when harissa, preserved lemon and olives wake up a chickpea burger, and umeboshi brightens black-eyed peas.
The overlong menu has its fumbles, like the damp salmon cakes and a chicken sandwich sapped of vigor by an icy cold peperonata. Bland rounds of zucchini stuffed with quinoa look and taste as if you could buy them over the counter by the quarter-pound.
And it can be tricky to compose (or “create,” as the menu urges) a meal. That glorious (and organic) chicken breast is only $13, but it comes solo. With sides averaging $7 each, you could wind up paying more than $25 for a D.I.Y. assemblage of protein, grains and vegetables. (In another restaurant this would be called an entree.)
The vegan desserts, made by Molly Jahn and Emilie Berner, tend to the prudish: kanten, a sort of jellied smoothie, and wafers of chocolate shortcake so flimsy they fold instead of crumble. (Oh, right, no butter.) Only mousse, whipped together from avocado, palm sugar and raw cacao, flirts with the dark side.
The pretty storefront is inviting, with boxwoods and begonias in stone planters, and shelves inside are lined with mother-in-law’s tongues. Above, leaf cutouts in a sheet of metal cast a shadow trellis. (An actual garden can be glimpsed through the back window, although it is inaccessible from the restaurant.) Menus are affixed to pieces of used produce boxes; lamp shades suggest giant hives made of rings of corrugated cardboard.
And if there is an aura of franchise here — bags of chips (kale, of course) by the cash register, an online customer loyalty rewards program — what of it? The effervescent Ms. Hill hopes to take Ellary’s Greens to airports across the country, for which dehydrated and cranky travelers should be grateful. But first, could we have one in Midtown?
