Almayass
Middle Eastern
24 East 21st Street,
212-473-3100
ANY time a server in Manhattan informs you that “all our food is served family style,” you can be certain that the dining room will be notably free of actual families. Platters that might feed two children and their parents are more likely to languish before a herd of bachelors and bachelorettes, who will reflexively hoist forks to their mouths while getting drunk on cocktails invented by publicists.
I found myself wondering where all the family restaurants have gone while spending time at Almayass, which opened this spring on East 21st Street, a few steps from the gang-grazing mess halls of lower Park Avenue. Every time I ate there I saw enormous tables covered with lemony hummus, yogurt-coated eggplant dolmas and canapés of spiced meats under quail’s-egg bull’s-eyes, and at least one of those tables would be swarmed by a large clan, from grandparents to their children to their children’s tiny infants taking a turn on one shoulder after another.
This was unusual enough in that part of town; still more striking was that whenever a baby vocalized some urgent complaint, there were no grimaces of infanticidal rage at the other tables. Or on the faces of the people working there, several of them members of the Alexandrian family.
Rita and Shant Alexandrian, the children of Armenians who fled the 1915 purge and later settled in Lebanon, operate the original Almayass in Beirut and its spinoffs in Kuwait, Riyadh, Abu Dhabi and Qatar, all of them with Armenian-Lebanese menus shaped by their family history.
In fact, family values set the tone for the whole experience of eating at Almayass. At times that is refreshing; occasionally, like one’s own family, it can drive you slightly bananas.
One waiter, for instance, played the overbearing uncle. When we asked for suggestions, he wrote down what he thought we should eat. It took some haggling to replace any of his selections with one of our own.
Another reminded us of the kind of shiftless cousin who never stays focused. He seemed to forget we were there for vast periods of time. When we had all finished the initial pours of a bottle of white Chateau Musar, one man at our table flagged him down to ask for a refill. The waiter emptied the bottle into his glass, filling it almost to the brim, as the rest of us stared.
Although I never determined which servers were related and which were merely in the wrong line of work, there were moments at Almayass when I understood why there are laws against nepotism.
Yet sooner or later the table would be spread with food, and sometimes that is enough, especially when the flavors are ones you don’t taste every day. That’s definitely the case at Almayass, where the Alexandrians punch up Lebanese dishes with Armenian accents like lemony grains of crushed red sumac berries and flecks of Aleppo pepper that offer more robust flavor than fiery heat. The restaurant even stages a Manhattan comeback for some Armenian classics.
Another question: Where have Armenian restaurants gone? A fixture of the city’s dining scene 50 years ago, they had all but vanished by the end of the last century. Ever since, certain New Yorkers have nursed longings for subereg, a labor-intensive lasagna variant, and basterma, considered by some cured-meat connoisseurs the highest form to which pastrami can aspire.
Both desires can be requited at Almayass. One woman at my table hadn’t tasted subereg since the death of an Armenian aunt who was educated in a French convent in Istanbul; she pronounced Almayass’s exquisitely tender and subtle version “right,” if not quite as good as the suberegs of her memories. The tangy and peppery basterma made a strong case for the Armenian charcuterie canon. So did an intense beef salami called soujuk, especially the version topped with sliced lemon and ground sumac, doused with arrack and set on fire at tableside.
An Armenian bulgur 
 named Itch (how it must hate its parents for that), with chopped herbs and 
, had a red-pepper glow that kept luring me back, once the chill of the refrigerator had worn off.
The bulk of the cooking, though, is Lebanese, ranging from terrific dips to less terrific kebabs. Meats and seafood at Almayass tended to be overcooked; grilled prawns one night were so tough that I sliced them with effort and swallowed them with regret.
I found only one main course that I truly enjoyed, broiled lamb chops that you pick up by their ribs so you can swab them in a secret Almayass sauce that seems to go into nearly everything, but tasted especially welcome here.
The hunting was happier among the small dishes. The salads, like green olives dressed with a spicy tomato sauce and lemon juice, tasted radiant, a Levantine beach-side afternoon beamed down to Flatiron.
I would have happily eaten a fistful of the kebbe sajieh, fried pockets of beef and bulgur kneaded together and stuffed with walnuts and pistachios.
And while the pita had no charm, that mattered less when it was dunked into dips like the lemony charred eggplant mash called moutabbal; its cousin, moutabbal Almayass, made with beets and tahini; and the mouhammara, a rust-colored paste of walnuts and red pepper that gets its sweet-sour shuffle from pomegranate molasses.
Parties of eight or more, and not just multigenerational families, seem drawn to Almayass. In part this is because ordering for that many people lessens the impact of the occasional rogue kebab. (In small-plates restaurants as in insurance, the larger the participating group, the lower the risk to the individual.)
But these big tables may also be responding to some kind of secret signal of hospitality sent out by the unmistakably family-run restaurant. One Alexandrian sister, Siran, designed the menus, with their covers of inlaid wood; another, Alidz, watches over the dining room with Varak, her brother; their mother, Rita, chose the sculpture of blue-glass flowers on wire stems and other works by Armenian artists around the interior. Almayass can be frustrating and deeply idiosyncratic at times, but it always feels personal.
The Armenian restaurant scene, it turns out, went west, to greater Los Angeles. As for family restaurants, they thrive in the outer boroughs, exiled by the forces of real estate. When somebody dares to open one in Manhattan now, it’s worth marking the event. I’d recommend celebrating with a plate or two of flaming soujuk.
