Porsena
Italian
21 East Seventh Street,
212-228-4923
“No roast pork?” the groupies mutter while reading the menu at 
, a cozy new Italian place in the East Village. Sara Jenkins, the chef and an owner, already runs a nearby storefront called Porchetta, a culinary one-hit wonder dedicated to a fennel- and garlic-scented pork roast. It is one of the great meats of Manhattan, but you have to perch on a stool or decamp to Tompkins Square Park to eat it.
If Porchetta is a spare and brilliant short story, Porsena is a fantastically readable novel. Billed as a “
 restaurant,” it is a crimson-painted, wood-floored space with banquettes, a comfortable bar (serving only Italian wine and some bottled beers), and worthwhile detours on the way to pasta.
Charred, chewy-soft crostini ($8 to $9) are made from Sullivan Street’s casareccio bread, and served with tasty decorations like salami, anchovies, butter, bottarga, local mozzarella and pickled onions. The same toasts come piled up next to a crock of whipped salt cod, not overly salty but gilded with oil and garlic ($11; it wants a squeeze of lemon at the table). There are three 
 ($8 to $10), all excellent precursors to pasta: a crunchy one of green beans, celery and fennel; a chunky Greek-style one with romaine, red onion and cucumber; and a Caesar-inspired one involving escarole, slightly wilted but not warm, in a creamy anchovy bath. An appetizer of pork aspic ($11) may be there to placate the meat freaks: it won’t do much for anyone else, being a rather ordinary terrine with a jellied layer and a too-salty 
 crisp.
And now to the pasta. Ms. Jenkins spent large chunks of her early life in Italy (her mother is the food writer 
, who has contributed to The New York Times), and seems to have approached the menu with a goal of reconciling Italian and American notions about pasta. (In short: Italians want to eat a small amount, then move on to something else; Americans eat it as a hearty main course.)
For the main-course brigade, there is a lush and crackly bowl of penne with roasted cauliflower and oily bread crumbs ($15); pasta rings in a breathlessly spicy and bitter homage to Bolognese made from lamb sausage and mustard greens ($17); small twists in “una marea di formaggi,” an ocean of cheeses that includes a tangy whiff of blue ($17). These are all memorably delicious.
For the minimalists, there are a couple of simply sauced spaghettis: sweet tomato, laced and softened with Parmesan ($14); garlic and parsley with Manila clams ($16). But neither of those dishes had the refined brightness that makes simplicity worthwhile, and the clam pasta was just far too salty. Two other pasta dishes — lasagna ($22) and plump maccheroni ($16) — are sauced with a traditional slow-cooked meat ragù: worthy, but not worth a trip.
If appetite remains, there are a few mains to follow: the wine-braised beef shank with polenta ($25) and the pork chop ($26) are solid, if not inspired.
But most skip right to the excellent desserts — lemon olive oil cake, chocolate-walnut cake, or panna cotta ($8) — as did the local couple at the next table who were celebrating their 63rd wedding anniversary on a recent evening.
“There’s a chocolate person and a lemon person in every marriage,” she said, ordering for him.
