Nights and Weekends
American, Caribbean
1 Bedford Avenue,
718-383-5349
For many, the heat waves and humidity can’t end soon enough. But summer, minus the inconveniences, continues to be on offer at Nights and Weekends in Greenpoint.
The triangular space, painted gray and lighted by seashell sconces, feels like an outdoor cafe. The breeze blows in through oversize doors and fold-down windows. A soundtrack of island beats completes the Havana-meets-hipster ambience, as does Ken Addington’s Cuban- and West Indian-inspired menu.
Mr. Addington, as keen followers of the local restaurant scene will know, is also the chef at 
, the Aussie-American destination just across the street. At Nights and Weekends, he’s forgone devils on horseback and shepherd’s pie for small plates dominated by seafood and repetitive accents of citrus, mango and mint. Among the best are the crispy rock shrimp ($10), scented with orange and chile, and the fried shishito peppers ($6) sprinkled with flaky salt and more orange (in this case an inspired addition). Hungrier patrons should choose the croque señora ($14), a classic cubano with roast pork, ham, Gruyère cheese, chopped pickles and mustard, gilded with a sunny-side-up egg on top.
Not every option is rock solid. The ceviche of the day ($11) — arctic char in a heavy mango sauce one night — lacked heat and acid, though it was satisfying enough if scooped up with the salty plantain chips served on the side. Dessert is an afterthought. The only one on a recent visit was a mango-
 cake ($6), which tasted neither of rum nor of mango, but like a supermarket birthday cake.
But that’s forgivable. Nights and Weekends is more a bar with great food than full-on restaurant. The best dishes support the tropical (but thankfully never sweet) cocktails and impressive list of aged rums and cachaças. The Mi Corazon ($10) is a surprisingly good balance of creamy, sweet coconut with lime and a hit of spicy peppers on the finish, while the Improved Malecon Old Fashioned ($10) delivers on its name, mixing aged rum and a touch of rich blackstrap molasses. Both are excellent ways to toast the summer now, or long after it has gone. 
