Ngam
Thai
99 Third Avenue,
212-777-8424
“CUTIE DUCKLING” is not an exact translation. In Thai, the name of the dish is kaeng phet pet yang, or red curry grilled duck. But the chef, Hong Thaimee, wanted something less prosaic for the menu. On a recent evening at Ngam, her restaurant in the East Village, she mused, “Maybe I should call it ‘Naughty Duckling’ instead.”
It is naughtier than cute. For starters, it is not a duckling, but half an adult duck, roasted, then plunged into the deep fryer until the skin is dark gold and crackling. There is nothing demure about the red curry, either, with its tickling heat. Litchis loll on the plate amid slivers of pineapple and whole cherry 
 that softly implode under a fork.
The curry itself is thin, closer to soup than the gravy that certain Thai restaurants appease Westerners with. Nevertheless, it is rich, dappled with fat. Do not protest: In these tiny, shining pools are concentrated all the mighty Thai flavors that seize you by the throat.
Ms. Thaimee, 35, has done stints at the Mandarin Oriental Dhara Dhevi hotel in her native Chiang Mai, and at Perry St. in New York. Ngam, which opened in the fall, is less polished, intentionally so. The garagelike space is a jigsaw of exposed brick and broken plaster. Air ducts snake above, around looping wires and naked bulbs. An electric sign declares “LOVE.”
The best, if not the most comfortable, place to eat is up front, at the counter by the open kitchen. Sit and watch. Inhale. The women cooking are motherly, ask after your health and firmly correct your Thai pronunciation.
The food is not pure Thai, the kind you find in the firepots of Woodside, Queens. But neither is it watered down. Rather, it takes Western notions about food and accommodates them, while staying true to the Thai palate.
In the chicken laab ($12), a 
 spiked with lime, chile, fish sauce, shallots and cilantro, the meat is not ground, as is traditional, but coarsely chopped and deep-fried into burnished nuggets — the better for popping compulsively into your mouth.
Chunks of pear and apple are an unexpected, bright counterpoint to the raw chiles in the papaya salad ($10). Khao soi ($18), a humble dish of curried noodles, is transformed into a fever dream of beet-stuffed ravioli submerged in a dusky yellow curry broth bristling with pickled mustard. The heat may take the roof of your mouth off.
Pad thai is served straight ($12 to $16, depending on choice of protein) or upgraded with lobster ($26) or with springy strands of green papaya standing in for rice noodles ($16). All versions err on the side of sweetness.
Ms. Thaimee styles her cooking as modern comfort food. Thus, the Indian-inflected massaman curry ($20), dense with short rib, carrots and sweet potatoes, has a puff-pastry lid, like a potpie. Now, this is cute. It might hearten an Englishman down on his luck in Bangkok. Others will wish it had less palm sugar.
A rustic chicken soup ($7) is clear and consoling. But corn chowder ($7), muddied with lemon grass and galangal, bears little resemblance to its namesake.
The course of true love never did run smooth. All is forgiven upon the arrival of the whole branzino (market price), deep-fried and curled on the plate as if biting its own tail. It comes littered with Thai basil, wild ginger and branches of green peppercorns. You will want to tear off pieces with your fingers, crunch the skin between your teeth. Do.
Delivering the fish to a group of diners one night, Ms. Thaimee leaned forward. “This is my favorite,” she said. “I can’t wait for you to try it.” Neither could they.
