The Breslin Bar and Dining Room
American, English
16 West 29th Street,
646-214-5788
A SNACK to start, scrumpets: shredded lamb, breaded and fried, served with sweet mint vinaigrette. Also a soft-boiled  Scotch egg, the orb caked in sausage meat, then breaded and fried.
Dinner follows. It begins with a cup of onion soup in which you could stand a spoon, and toast slathered in bone-marrow butter. There is also fried head cheese with sauce gribiche, king of mayonnaise. Your entree is a deep-fried stuffed pig’s foot, the size of a toddler’s leg. It is meant for two people. It could serve a table of four.
For dessert, sticky toffee pudding and a marvelous version of Eton mess, meringue slathered in lemon ricotta cream. There is also eggnog as interpreted by someone interested in the intersection of hallucinogens and psychotherapy, all folded egg whites and sugar: liquid velvet, ecstasy in a cup. A shot of Sailor Jerry overproof spiced rum is down at the bottom of it, a base of caramel beneath the cloud of white. It is either an antidote or a force multiplier. It may be both.
This is the Breslin on a Thursday night, a warm, crowded and vaguely British barroom off the lobby of the Ace Hotel: a bedlam of gastrotourists and scenemakers. It’s Hogwarts for hipsters.
It is also the Breslin on a Saturday night, and on a Tuesday night, whenever you come in the door in darkness and hunger. The restaurant takes no reservations; it celebrates a democracy of the committed. Save for at breakfast, over pancakes and Stumptown coffee, the restaurant is almost perpetually jammed.
At night, out in the bar, people dance in place, drink amber cocktails, listen to music that bounces smartly between rock and hip-hop. They wait endlessly for tables to clear. Their faces — mustachioed, unlined or dusted with glitter, behind geek glasses or Edie-style eyeliner — are filled with anticipation. At the tables in back, as they stare down shins and stomachs, sticky bits and syllabubs, they look a little scared.
Nowhere in New York right now is the fetish for pork fat and dairy flavor more on display. 
, the chef and an owner, is exhausting gallbladders nightly.
Ms. Bloomfield is well known to food crazies in New York. She arrived in 2004 as the kitchen force behind the Spotted Pig, in Greenwich Village, helping to deliver Manhattan its first true experience of a British gastropub.
In 2008, she and Ken Friedman, her partner in the Pig and now in the Breslin, opened the John Dory, a fish house in a narrow space on lower 10th Avenue. The restaurant didn’t work, but not because anyone faults the pairing of butter and fish. The partners spent about 30 seconds back on their heels. John Dory closed at the end of August 2009. The Breslin opened in October.
Now it’s pig parts for Ms. Bloomfield: an entree of gently smoked pork belly that’s been roasted to tender goo, for instance, over a drift of buttery mashed potatoes, with cabbage and bacon on the side. This is excellent. Now it’s warm smoked salmon with bacon, chives and a rich garlic and butter sauce. There are terrine boards and piccalilli, parsley served over everything, a garnish exalted. There is a marvelous Caesar 
: an herbed-up version with anchovy croutons. And a rich, salty mussel soup with curry butter. It tastes like a date you don’t want to end.
And it won’t, as it happens. The Breslin is the sort of restaurant you end up thinking about a lot, not always pleasantly, staring up at the ceiling at 3 in the morning in cold sweat and mild panic. Yes, the food is good. But it is monochromatically good: it is 10 colors of fat. Excess can become wretched, and fast. It’s cool to hook up with the Breslin, especially if you’re lucky enough to sit in one of the semiprivate nooks near the open kitchen. But we should see other people. It would be death to be a regular there.
That said, there is the pig’s foot. Regardless of what it will do to you later, it is a non-negotiable one-time order for those who eat feet. For them, if not everyone, it is a must-to-consume. (Get the sea bass if you’re horrified. It’s cooked on a plancha and served with Treviso, along with some potatoes and anchovies; it’s rich without being ostentatious.)
The French take a trotter and braise it forever, then coat the wobbly result in mustard and bread crumbs and fry it crisp. The Italians take the bones out, then stuff the skin with ground pork from the trotter and elsewhere — the same mixture they use for cotechino sausage — and sew it back into shape. Ms. Bloomfield somehow does both. She serves the fat result in gravy made of reduced braising liquid, thick with pillowy shallots and green flecks of deconstructed brussels sprouts. It’s very good: meat that is fat; fat that is meat. (Food that is sticky.)
A lamb burger acts as a kind of diet plate in contrast, gamy on its sourdough bun, with feta, cumin-rich mayonnaise and a cone of  wonderful steak fries, cooked three times so that the exterior shatters under the teeth and the middle tastes of mash. An appetizer of skate and potato terrine is also weirdly light, with a garlicky aioli that can lead a person gently into Ms. Bloomfield’s worldview. For milder entrees, there is a baby chicken, full of bright flavor alongside sweet roasted 
 and mint. But avoid the beef shin with polenta and black cabbage at all costs. It’s muddy in flavor, terribly dry.
The Breslin provides room service for the Ace Hotel. It is certainly pleasant to lie in one of the beds there, upstairs from the restaurant and nestled into a warm Pendleton blanket, looking out the window at the faux-Parisian top of Gilsey House across the street. To do so amid the detritus of a Breslin meal — that onion soup, for example, followed by a rich beef burger and fries, along with a can of Porkslap ale — is bliss.
It’s faster to sleep that way, for one thing, and since there’s no pig’s foot on the room-service menu, there actually will be sleep. The Breslin is great for burgers and beer. In the morning, back in the dining room, there is steel-cut oatmeal with brown sugar and cream. The Sex Pistols are on the stereo, softly. For a moment, all is right with the world.
★
16 West 29th Street, (212) 679-1939, 
.
Hogwarts for hipsters.
 Conversational din makes identifying  the loud music challenging: “Was that the Steve Miller Band?”
 Scrumpets, onion soup, Caesar 
, terrines, lamb burger, pork belly, pig’s foot, fries, cabbage and bacon, sticky toffee pudding, Eton mess.
 The food rewards beer drinkers, though your standard Oregon pinot noirs are available.
 Breakfast, $3.50 to $21. Lunch, $10 to $32. Dinner, snacks, $4 to $7; appetizers, $7 to $16; entrees, $17 to $32.
Monday to Friday, 7 to 11:45 a.m.; noon to 4 p.m.; 5:30 p.m. to 12 a.m. Saturday and Sunday, 7 a.m. to 4 p.m.; 5:30 p.m. to midnight. The bar is open daily until 4 a.m.
The Breslin does not accept reservations. Be prepared to wait.
 All major cards.
 Accessible.
 Ratings range from zero to four stars and reflect the reviewer’s reaction to food, ambience and service, with price taken into consideration. Menu listings and prices are subject to change.
