606 R & D
American
606 Vanderbilt Avenue,
718-230-0125
A horseradish and bacon sandwich: why has no one put this in front of me before? This is the question frequently posed at 606 R&D, a fresh and lovely storefront restaurant that opened in January. Not because the combinations are odd, but because they are often delightfully obvious: Spanish peanuts and pickled carrots ($5). Crisp toast and melted Cheddar ($8). A whole rotisserie chicken on a platter, bristling with watercress, lemon wedges and thick toast ($30).
The owners are Ilene Rosen and Sara Dima, both late of the City Bakery in the Flatiron district, where Ms. Rosen was in charge of the excellent food bar for 15 years.
The menu here changes often, but consistently reflects Ms. Rosen’s taste: for seasonal produce like endives, rhubarb and baby turnips; for local producers like the kosher Kaff Bakery and Kombucha Brooklyn; for salt and vinegar; and for the treats of her Brooklyn Jewish childhood. So there are after-school luxuries like chopped liver stuffed into celery sticks ($8), and chocolate-covered marshmallows and pretzels for dessert. At lunch, hot dogs ($8) share space with a spectacular hard-boiled-egg sandwich with green-olive tartar sauce ($8).
A smaller portion of the menu is dedicated to grown-up restaurant food like polenta with ramps ($14), sautéed soft-shell crabs ($16) and whole fish (market price). And, because it is apparently unlawful to open a restaurant without one, there is a bracing kale 
 with lots of toasted hazelnuts and shreds of hard cheese ($8). This small, high-ceilinged space, which is open steadily from breakfast through dinner, mirrors the food: simple and bright, with a focus on craft. And it is usually packed at the dinner rush with a mellow combination of young locals and older pilgrims from Park Slope. (No reservations are taken, and the restaurant has 31 seats.) All day, a counter up front sells bread, pastry (including spectacular babkas) and fresh cake doughnuts ($1.50).
