Ayada
Thai
77-08 Woodside Avenue  ,
718-424-0844
I KNEW Ayada was a serious Thai restaurant when I started weeping at my table.
I had just tasted the som tum ($7), a pyramid of shredded green papaya studded with peanuts and doused in a ruthless dressing of raw garlic, fresh lime, dried shrimp, salty nam pla (fish sauce), sugar and a nigh toxic level of bird’s-eye chilies. (These are chilies so potent that the smell of them cooking once set off a terror scare in London.)
One bite, and my eyes brimmed with tears. For a moment I thought my tongue was paralyzed. It was thrilling: so much of the Thai food in New York is docile, its spice neutered in a bid for Western palates. There were no such concessions here.
But heat is just one weapon in the Thai culinary arsenal. And it’s not simply a matter of heaping on more chilies; that’s machismo. Great Thai cooking is stealthier: big flavors obtained by subtle means.
The sour curry ($9)  was hot, too, if a tad less scorching than the som tum. But it was complicated, a sublime orchestration of tart and sweet, salt and burn. The curry was light as a soup, ruddy in color, saturated with mouth-puckering tamarind. A half-torn omelet with green veins (cha-om when in season, broccoli when not) bobbed on top, its frilly edges soaking up the broth.
Dining in most Thai restaurants in New York can be frustrating. There’s  ketchup in the pad thai and  in many dishes  extra sugar, a practice commonly reserved to appease  children.
But Ayada holds out a promise of satisfaction. Credit, in part, its  location, near Wat Buddha Thai Thavornvanaram, a Thai Buddhist temple in Elmhurst, Queens. The wat — whose blue peaked roof, scalloped in gold, rests atop a squat frame house like a beached spacecraft — is the epicenter of the neighborhood’s immigrant Thai community, which surely has some sway over the quality of the local food.
Ayada feels like the  family-run places  in Bangkok, small but clean and neat, well cared for. The walls, painted celadon and cinnabar, are covered with nearly two dozen photographs of the Thai royal family —  formal portraits, vacation snaps, a 19th-century news clipping (in French) commemorating a trip to Belgium by the king of what was then Siam.
The menu is encyclopedic, and there aren’t many overlaps — with the help of one of the patient waitresses, you can easily compose a meal in which each dish tastes wholly distinct. Better still, put yourself in the gentle but firm hands of the chef and owner, Duangjai Thammasat (known as Kitty), who hails from Pichit.  She’ll steer you toward anything with holy basil, whose flavor is sharp, less like licorice than cloves. Among the curries, she prefers panang ($8) to massaman ($8). (For the record, both are delicious.)
You could happily confine yourself to the salads, which include a torrid larb gai ($8) made with ground chicken, shallots, mint, cilantro and a dusting of roasted rice powder for a nutty finish. Green mango comes with raw crab, to be sucked from the claws ($9), or with catfish that’s been flaked and deep fried so it looks like lace and melts instantly in the mouth ($10). Raw shrimp steeped in lime are arranged like petals, each topped by a hefty chunk of garlic ($9). They’re a doleful gray, gummy to the touch, and irresistible.
At times Ayada has an almost town-hall atmosphere. Diners exclaim over the cuteness of children at neighboring tables, and Ms. Thammasat pops out of the kitchen to greet regulars. Some swing by just for fried bananas and leave crestfallen if none are available. Equally sought after is a dessert of mango (so ripe it’s nearly molten)  with sticky rice that’s been steamed with sweetened coconut milk until buttery ($6).
Ms. Thammasat previously ran a grocery down the street.  Near the entrance to Ayada, she keeps a narrow bookcase stocked with tubes of durian paste and packets of dehydrated mango slices, grilled seaweed crisps and garlic bread. It’s a gesture of respect for the past, and perhaps a reminder of the importance of honoring your origins.
 
77-08 Woodside Avenue (77th Street), Elmhurst, Queens, (718) 424-0844.
RECOMMENDED DISHES Sour curry with shrimp and broccoli omelet; fried whole fish with basil sauce; crispy catfish with green mango 
; spicy chicken salad; crispy pork with Chinese broccoli.
PRICE RANGE $4 to $22.
HOURS 11 a.m. to 11 p.m.
RESERVATIONS For six or more.
CREDIT CARDS All major cards.
WHEELCHAIR ACCESS The door of the restaurant is wide  enough for a wheelchair; the dining room is on the same level as the  restroom, which is large and equipped with a handrail.
