Bago
Asian, Philippine
43 East Seventh Street,
212-982-3006
Bonito flakes wave like tattered flags, great shreds of them over a heap of ground pork still agitated from the frying pan, riled up by fermented black beans and fish sauce. Japanese Kewpie mayonnaise brings scattered sweet high notes and a deeper tang than its Western cousins. Under it all, French fries lie in wait, with charred tips.
At 
, a restaurant in residence since July at the subterranean East Village bar Jimmy’s No. 43, this dish is called halo-halo fries, a name borrowed from a Filipino dessert, translated as “mix-mix” in Tagalog. You could think of it as a pan-Asian take on Canadian poutine. For the chef, 
 — the titular Tito King — the nostalgic reference is disco fries, the dancing bonito flakes doing the Hustle.
Mr. Phojanakong, whose mother is Filipino and whose father is Thai, has long specialized in a kind of “mix-mix” cuisine, drawing from both his parents’ culinary traditions at the 12-year-old 
 on the Lower East Side. (His other restaurant, Umi Nom in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, closed in August.)
His brief menu at Jimmy’s includes chicken wings braised in a classic Filipino soy-and-vinegar adobo, deep-fried and served alongside the soy-blackened whole garlic cloves they were braised with. Pork belly is requisite — as the poet 
, “When God was Filipino, / he put a pig and fire together and called it porkissimo” — and likewise cooked in adobo, then seared until the outside crackles and laid like swollen tongues on soft corn tortillas, with a sluice of bird’s-eye chiles, palm sugar and lime for salsa.
This is food meant to encourage drinking, a fine enough mission in this amber-lit cavernous space, with antlers on the wall and lancet arches. There’s a respectable burger, made with grass-fed beef and given intrigue with sriracha-spiked Kewpie, atchara (pickled carrots and green papaya) and a trickle of Maggi sauce, sweet, briny and carnal, the stealth ingredient in many Filipino larders.
The rest of the menu — shishito peppers, inevitably blistered; overstolid dumplings; arid fried rice — seems slightly perfunctory. Mr. Phojanakong has a more ambitious restaurant to tend to and isn’t always on the premises. He stops by later in the evening, on his way home from Kuma Inn; perhaps it’s best to time your visit accordingly.
Mr. Phojanakong grew up in Stuyvesant Town (and lives there still), as did Carla Cinco, who in June opened 
 not far from Tito King’s, just north of the East Village’s Little Manila cluster of Filipino restaurants (Maharlika, Jeepney, Krystal’s Cafe 81). From the window, she can look down the street at what was once Elvie’s Turo-Turo, the cafeteria-style storefront that her mother, a native of Northern Samar province in the Philippines, ran for more than a decade before retiring and handing over the business to Ms. Cinco’s sister.
Elvie’s closed shortly after, in 2009. Bago is a modest, affectionate sequel, a small, bright box of a room barely decorated beyond a few food photographs and potted yuccas. In lieu of turo-turo (“point-point”) chafing trays, dishes are cooked to order and brought to your table or counter. Salted duck eggs and the more challenging balut (fertilized eggs with embryonic ducklings intact) are on hand, and Ms. Cinco hopes to introduce bulaklak soon, once she finds a source for high-quality pork ruffle fat.
Almost everything is under $10, including a scaled-down version of crispy pata, typically a monumental pig hoof that could be wielded as a club. To make a manageable portion for a solo diner, Ms. Cinco cuts the pork leg into quarters. What arrives on the plate is almost demure, a crumpled garter of gilded skin and fat, still clinging to bone, to be dipped in a finger bowl’s worth of soy and vinegar, suffused by jalapeños.
The food here is studiously simple: a relaxed, long-simmered chicken adobo; bok choy and spinach afloat in an almost monastic broth, faintly sour with tamarind juice; breakfast assemblages of fried whole milkfish, sweet-hot sausage or dark, thin, caramelly cuts of beef, each abetted by a fried egg and powerfully garlicky rice.
At times, dishes are seasoned with an overly gentle hand. Trying to make the food accessible, Ms. Cinco calls lumpia merely “rolls” on the menu and defines halo-halo as an “icy tapioca shake,” as if it were kin to bubble tea.
It’s so much more, with orbs of ube (purple yam) in alternating hues and textures of ice cream and jam, poised over ice crushed almost to powder, every corner possessed by condensed milk. In the depths lurk slippery, jellylike palm seeds, langka (jackfruit) and macapuno (preserved young coconut). You’ll want a longer spoon.
