Dhaba
Indian
108 Lexington Avenue,
212-679-1284
IN India dhabas are truck stops, roadside joints famous for their vibrant meals (and convenient cots for napping them off). The food at Dhaba is just as lively, but the flavors are surprisingly complex and subtle, and the dining room has less in common with a tin-roofed shack in India than with a lounge of a boutique hotel.
This is the eighth restaurant for the owner, Shiva Natarajan, and his third in Manhattan. At Dhaba, he created a menu with more than 125 items, not including the lunch specials. The cuisine tilts toward India’s north, with a handful of southern dishes and British-style curries to round it out. If you look lost, the waiters will gently direct you toward conventional favorites like kebabs and chicken masala.
Don’t give in. Start with paya soup ($4.95), meaty goat trotters and chewy tendons in an earthy ginger broth. Share an order of tale huay caju ($3.95), cashews flash-cooked with chilies and spices. The slightly charred nuts are addictive, and just the right counterpart for a 20-ounce mug of Kingfisher lager ($6).
It’s tempting to order too much from the opening pages, and fill yourself with starters like lime and ginger chicken wings ($6.95), or chaats like dahi bhalla ($5.95), lentil flour fritters with yogurt, tamarind sauce and mint.
It’s worth it to save yourself for the main courses, such as the achari gosht ($14.95), lamb cooked in a rich sauce of ginger, garlic, chilies, mustard seeds and other spices too numerous to mention. So often the meat in a dish like this is an afterthought. But here the lamb was stewed until fork-tender and its flavors were heightened by the seasonings, which were mild enough to benefit from the heat of a chili onion naan ($3.95).
The kadai goat ($17.95) was even more sumptuous. Thick slices of meat still on the bone were served in a peppery sauce flavored with fenugreek leaves. The herb had a hard-to-place flavor that reminded me of dried mint and nutmeg. There was a similar spicing in the kadai bhindi ($12.95), a platter of okra sautéed so expertly that the vegetables still had their snap.
Dhaba, which opened in the fall, stands out on this cheap and cheerful stretch of lower Lexington Avenue. It’s pricier than most of its neighbors, but not by much. And at night it attracts an animated crowd, most of which seems to be on group dates.
It’s quieter during the day, when lunch buffets rule the neighborhood. Most food suffers in a chafing dish, but Dhaba’s offerings are nearly as good as when ordered à la carte, and at $9.95 it’s one of the city’s great culinary bargains.
A few misses are inevitable when a restaurant presents such an exhaustive menu. The methi chicken ($13.95) was unremarkable, and the Highway Dhaba ($8.50), a mango lassi with champagne, might be the worst drink ever mixed in New York. As for dessert, a sweet tooth is better served elsewhere. But the lion’s share of what I tasted at Dhaba was made with skill and care.
It was the case even with the British curries ($12.95 to $16.95), something of an inside joke, a reinvention of Commonwealth comfort food. They might resonate if you grew up eating sweet and tangy jalfrezi or the famously spicy phaal, a dish Bengali immigrants invented in London.
These days phaal has a chest-thumping cult of chili-seekers, and at least one New York restaurant has turned finishing an order into a dare. Dhaba’s lamb phaal ($14.95) was plenty hot, but it wasn’t punitive. Actually, it was quite tasty, and the lamb was so delectable that eating it was a pleasure, not a challenge.
108 Lexington Avenue (28th Street), (212) 679-1284; 
.
 Tale huay caju (spicy sautéed cashews); paya soup (goat trotter soup with ginger); chili onion naan; kadai bhindi (spiced okra); achari gosht (curry lamb with spices); kadai goat (goat with garlic and bell peppers).
 Starters and side dishes $1.50 to $10.95, breads $2.50 to $4.95, main courses $10.95 to $20.95, all-you-can-eat lunch buffet is $9.95 (except Sunday, $12.95).
 All major cards accepted.
Accepted.
Friday and Saturday noon to midnight, Sunday through  Thursday noon to 11 p.m.
Two steps down to dining room; bathrooms are small.
