Flex Mussels
Seafood
174 East 82nd Street,
212-717-7772
AT first glance the words “Flex Mussels” would seem no more than a silly play on homonyms — and something of a groaner at that. But read through this restaurant’s menu, on which one fanciful mussel dish leads to another and then another after that, and you realize that its name is actually a truncated manifesto, a decree of intent, which is to show off mussels as they’ve never been shown off before.
You can have mussels in a skillet with chipotle, chorizo and calamari, or you can have them in a tall, hooded pot with pearls of roasted corn, diced country ham and a bourbon-inflected, mustard-spiked cream sauce.
You can have the Geisha Girl mussels, which, as it happens, do not involve their transport to the table by a fawning, bowing server. The dish’s tag signals the presence of sake and pickled ginger.
You can have the Acadian mussels, which spirit you to a moss-draped bayou, arranging the mussels over gumbo, or the Thai mussels, a Siamese expedition that recruits coconut and lemon grass.
When it comes to perfuming and festooning the liquid used to steam mussels, Flex taps into a seemingly limitless larder: San Marzano 
 (for the Fra Diavolo mussels), kaffir lime (the South Pacific mussels), dark rum (the Negril mussels), Pernod (the Provençal).
Flex approaches mussels the way Baskin-Robbins or Ben & Jerry’s approaches 
: as a starting point, a canvas, a vehicle for a pleasantly hyperactive imagination.
And as you lower your spoon into one of the festively colored, boldly seasoned pools underneath mussels or dip hunks of thick, fresh bread into it, you realize that the restaurant’s name is also, in the end, a bit of misdirection. Flex isn’t entirely about the bivalve. It’s just as much about the broth.
That’s as it should be. A mussel can only preen so much. Its cooking isn’t tricky, and its eating can turn slightly monotonous if there aren’t currents of additional flavor rushing in. At Flex there are currents and riptides and veritable tsunamis, and monotony is less of a danger than drowning.
Tucked away in an unremarkably attractive, half-underground space on the Upper East Side that’s too far off Third Avenue to draw much foot traffic, Flex Mussels has nonetheless become a crowded neighborhood favorite since its opening late last year, when the restaurant economy had already turned sour.
So it provides some interesting suggestions of what still works.
Restaurants benefit from having a clear identity and making a claim that dozens of other restaurants aren’t already making. In Flex’s case, that’s mussel mania.
And restaurants do well to give diners a clear path to a meal that’s relatively economical while also filling. That’s where Flex and its spotlighted fare really deliver, in that a hillock of the mussels, coupled with plenty of broth-soaked bread, makes for a sizable dinner without a sizable check.
The mussel dishes — more than 20 in all — range from $16 to $20. For that top price you get a few chunks of 
, either in a dish called the Maine, which also has smoked bacon and corn, or a dish simply called the Bisque, which has brandy, tomato and cream. The Bisque was among my favorites, and required the use of not just an entire second serving of bread but also the beginnings of a third.
You can drink relatively affordably at Flex, too. The succinct but appealing wine list, which supplements a terrific international array of beers, has few bottles over $75 and many under $50.
The rest of the menu isn’t priced quite as gently or coherently. The presence of some bacon on an iceberg wedge with blue 
 doesn’t make it worth $12, not in a setting like Flex’s, which for all its prettily framed photographs of seascapes and fishing villages remains windowless, low-ceilinged and slightly claustrophobic.
In such a setting, appetizers of $16 (a mix of fried calamari, shrimp and oysters) and $17 (two crab cakes) seem just a tad exorbitant. Both of these appetizers, though, were better than what you get at many other citified fish shacks.
That’s the genre to which Flex Mussels in many senses belongs. It has a changing selection of a half-dozen different oysters, and the kitchen, run by Michael Bicocchi, turns out the requisite chowder (respectable), lobster roll (serviceable) and fish and chips (good).
Flex’s lineage, though, is distinctive. Has any other restaurant traveled the same migratory route? The original Flex Mussels is in Charlottetown, the capital of Prince Edward Island, which is to mussels what Alba is to white truffles.
I had the good fortune of eating at that Flex twice during a trip to Canada in 2007, and I wish that this Flex, which gets its mussels from Prince Edward Island, did the same lobster tempura roll, dressed with a wasabi aioli, and followed its forebear’s lead in putting salmon as well as cod into the fish and chips.
I also wish this Flex were as orderly, with service as smooth. At its busiest, the bottleneck of human traffic around the host station is impenetrable, and your table can become a lonely colony to which food is exported fitfully.
One night a friend and I got the first of it — oysters — almost a full hour after we’d been seated. We never got the sauces (mignonette, cocktail) that the person who delivered the oysters said he would be back with, and when we later mentioned that to our waiter, he asked, “Who told you the sauces would be coming?”
“The guy who brought the oysters,” I responded.
“Well, when I tell you I’ll bring something, I do,” he said, as if the issue were a rightful apportionment of guilt. He even sounded hurt. How insensitive of us.
But how lucky of us to find room for dessert. Most of Flex’s aren’t fancy, and that’s their  charm: they bypass much of the usual decorative hooey for a down-home appeal.
That night we had strawberry shortcake, a classic too seldom revisited in restaurants. We also had a chocolate-and-cream-cheese homage to a whoopie pie.
It’s called Making Whoopie, and it made me wish we’d had the Geisha Girl just beforehand, in the interests of semantic naughtiness.
★
174 East 82nd Street; (212) 717-7772, 
A deep, narrow series of half-underground rooms with seaside visual motifs but a somewhat airless feel.
 Loud.
Burnt Fingers mix of fried seafood; chowder; Thai, Southern, Mexican, South Pacific and Bisque mussels; strawberry shortcake; chocolate sandcastle.
 Short but international and affordable, with an even better selection of Canadian and other beers.
 Appetizers, $10 to $17; entrees, $16 to $30; desserts, $9 to $12.
From 5:30 to 11 p.m. Monday to Thursday, to 11:30 Friday and Saturday and to  10 p.m. Sunday.
Call at least three days ahead.
 All major cards.
 Inaccessible.
 Ratings range from zero to four stars and reflect the reviewer’s reaction to food, ambience and service, with price taken into consideration. Menu listings and prices are subject to change.
