Fishtail by David Burke
American, Seafood
135 East 62nd Street,
212-754-1300
ALTHOUGH the restaurant Fishtail by David Burke focuses, as its vain mouthful of a name suggests, on seafood, its defining dish has nothing to do with the ocean. And it comes along late in a meal, after the lavishly attired seafood tacos and the pretzel-crusted crab cake and the “calamari mac & cheese” and the “angry mussels” (who ticked them off?) and the potato-zucchini latke with a shot glass of applesauce.
It’s a dessert called “can o’ cake.” And it indeed shows up in a can, this molten chocolate miasma that you can let your server blast tableside with toffee crunch and 
 and what-have-you, although that’s not the odd or flamboyant part.
No, the clincher is that along with the cake, which is really more of a fudgy and spectacularly cloying brownie, you’re given a mixing bowl and several batter-slathered mixing paddles. You can sweep the goo from them with your fingers. Or you can just dispense with such matters of stuffy etiquette, stick out your tongue and lick.
If you find this prospect exciting — and apt in an establishment that charges more than $30 for many entrees — you may well take a bright, scaly shine to Fishtail. If not, consider yourself warned.
While several lines of type on the restaurant’s elaborately segmented, deeply fatiguing menu trumpet its commitment to sustainable seafood, there’s at least as high a premium on silliness, and exuberance is everything. With Mr. Burke, the trailblazing inventor of the cheesecake lollipop, that’s often the case.
Like many of his similarly successful peers, he’s as much showman as chef, though he’s a particular kind of showman, happy to act the clown, eager to play the prankster. You get the sense that if, at some pivotal juncture in his past, he had been handed a microphone instead of a spatula, he’d be doing stand-up now.
He’s vain but not proud. Just a few years back he agreed to write the menu for Hawaiian Tropic Zone, a Midtown mega-restaurant — closed for renovations at the moment — where waitresses didn’t wear much. He further consented to pose for advertisements in which he, the beefy cook in white, was flanked by servers in bikinis. The type above the image said, “Beauty and the Feast.” Mr. Burke was the feast part.
At Fishtail he takes a decidedly more serious approach, producing a restaurant with some real charms, among them its smooth, upbeat service and an attractive, comfortable setting in an Upper East Side town house that once housed Jovia.
The deep, narrow downstairs has a slim lane for traffic between the bar and a row of booths for casual dining. Upstairs is a dining room with proper tables and more elbow room. The décor hews to the culinary theme, including cartoon-bright fish paintings and, behind the bar, a tank of 
 whose quick, constant movement is the tip-off that they’re fake. Not even Shakira wriggles that relentlessly.
As for the eating, you can insist on a straightforward experience, paying more heed, say, to the extensive raw bar selections than to the elaborately composed dishes.
And there’s some lovely fish under the menu heading of “Today’s Whole Fish & Simple Fish,” which signals that the saucing in these dishes is at least somewhat less likely to get out of hand. A fillet of halibut found here was delicate in texture and pure in flavor. A recent night’s appetizer special of Scottish langoustines and entree special of turbot did justice to the luxury ingredients.
What’s more, some of the games Mr. Burke plays elsewhere on the menu are tempered ones with happy payoffs. It was a fetching pique that those angry mussels were in, because the chili oil and fried basil used in their cooking didn’t exist entirely apart from them — so often the case with the broth around bivalves. In this appetizer the seasonings had worked their way into the mussels, which had the additional virtues of being plump and tender.
If Fishtail succeeded in preparing more of the food with the care those mussels and the halibut received, the silliness and exuberance of so many of Mr. Burke’s conceits might have a more endearing effect.
But under the first executive chef, Eric Hara, and under his successor, John Tesar, the kitchen turned out plenty of clunkers: mealy octopus; a 
 carbonara with bits of bacon as hard as pellets; tough prawns arranged prettily but pointlessly over the gluiest, saddest, blandest little pesto ravioli you can imagine.
It’s through the prism of these miscues that all the cartwheels the kitchen insists on turning can seem as exasperating as amusing. Are Mr. Burke and Fishtail spending their energy in the right way?
Their fussing over crab cakes is to be expected, inasmuch as few foodstuffs have received as much fussing over time. You’ve no doubt had them broad and flat, as if they were pancakes, and tall and round, as if they were meatballs.
At Fishtail their shape is less striking than their coating and accouterments. On my last visit I encountered the pretzel crusting, along with candied orange below the crab and honey around it. Pre-pretzel, the kitchen was tucking the crab in puffed rice. Both times, the crustacean itself was muffled.
That’s the danger of Mr. Burke’s ablutions and his aggressive approach, better suited to meat.
Or to vegetables. In fact the standout dish at Fishtail is a vegetable side: the cauliflower. It’s given one of those treatments popular with chefs of a superindulgent bent, who see no reason why vegetables should be any less rich than desserts. For an edifying primer head to the John Dory, in Chelsea, where April Bloomfield wickedly folds yogurt and orange blossom into carrots and has cooked sweet potatoes with marrow.
Fishtail’s cauliflower gets so much cream it’s nearly a custard, so much cheese it could impersonate a quiche. It gets bread crumbs, and a special cradle in the form of a small sauté pan, plunked right down on the table. Go ahead and empty it, unless you want to save room for the cake.
*
135 East 62nd Street; (212)  754-1300. 
A spacious Upper East Side town house with a lively, narrow, deep downstairs bar area and a more proper dining room above it.
 Moderately loud.
 Tempura calamari and oysters; tuna tartar tacos; “angry mussels;” halibut; Dover sole; cauliflower brûlée; gnocchi with wild mushrooms; apple tart; chocolate-peanut butter pudding.
 Diverse and spanning a suitable price spectrum, with attention to wines that go well with seafood.
 Appetizers, $12 to $21; entrees, $21 to $42; desserts, $8 to $19.
Dinner from 5 to 11 p.m. Monday through Thursday and to 11:30 p.m. Friday and Saturday, with raw-bar selections available from 4 p.m. to midnight on all days. Brunch and then dinner from noon to 10 p.m. Sunday, with raw bar open until 11 p.m.
Call about two weeks ahead for prime times.
 All major cards.
 Several steps down to entrance; accessible restroom on first floor and elevator to second.
 Ratings range from zero to four stars and reflect the reviewer’s reaction to food, ambience and service, with price taken into consideration. Menu listings and prices are subject to change.
