Asian Spicy Curry
Malaysian
46 Mulberry Street,
212-608-7440
Chinatown grows quiet here at night, near the southern end of Mulberry Street. 
 stands where Mulberry bends, between a funeral-supply shop and a dry cleaner. There are Chinese characters on the window, but the menu knows no borders: lox and French toast for breakfast, pierogies, paninis and linguine pomodoro for jury-duty lunch, bubble tea for kids just freed from school.
Come dark, the dining room dims and the TV goes black. Butcher paper is neatly clipped over the metal tabletops. Votive candles start brooding. The quick set change signals the arrival of a new chef in the kitchen, Yip Khuan Thye, a native of Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, bearing curry leaves and candlenuts.
Since April, this transformation has taken place almost nightly under a somewhat ungainly name, 
. The name is vague where the food is distinct: The curries draw from Malay, Indian and Chinese traditions, and are spicy only in the most literal sense, brimming over with spices rather than packing heat.
The curries on the succinct, single-minded menu are priced at $6 or $7, each a small world. Some are curry soups, with cloudy rust-red broths that suggest cream of velvet, thick with coconut and riled by fish paste. In one bowl, they’re topped with fat coils of shrimp, spongy fish cake and squid; in another, string beans and okra that snap against the teeth.
One night, a curry soup special took a sheet of crackling tofu skin as a canopy. Under it were triangles of tofu the size of tea sandwiches and stubs of eggplant, all stuffed with fish paste and strewn with more tofu skin, shattered, a glorious bronzed debris.
Each soup comes with your choice of noodles: doughy bands of ho fun; lo mein, as thin and symmetrical as pencils; and mei fun, flimsy angel hair. The waitress is likely to recommend mixing two, for contrast. Ho fun and lo mein, separated by degrees of chewiness, make a good tangle.
The other curries, hefty plates of chicken or beef, are paired with jasmine rice or crescents of roti flaking at the center, with edges worth gnawing on. Ground candlenuts bring lushness, crushed mint a muted brightness. Both are even better with a daub (or several) of the accompanying belacan, fermented shrimp paste fulminating with chile.
(You may politely ignore a dish of mysteriously bland noodles inked with sweet black soy sauce and heaped with shredded chicken, which a waitress explained was intended for curry-shy children.)
The pop-up premise is familiar (a transient dining experience in a borrowed space without the commitment of a lease), but Ms. Yip is neither a youngster trying to break into the restaurant business nor an established chef looking to experiment. She’s a home cook who for years contented herself with feeding friends.
Michelle Ma, whose father, David, opened Mama Eatery in 2007, used to bring containers of Ms. Yip’s curry to graduate school, where her classmates clamored for more. After she finished her degree in architecture, her father recruited her to run the pop-up as a showcase for Ms. Yip’s cooking.
The backdrop is still Mama Eatery, with a stallion rearing up on a panel of frosted glass by the door — a play on the name Ma, which means horse in Mandarin.
On the walls are framed jigsaw puzzles and posters of golden Labradors and penguins, juxtaposed with quotations from the likes of Antoine de Saint-Exupéry. Above, an oval cutout in the ceiling is filled with egg cartons, blue as a swimming pool.
Dessert may be an improvised plate of honeydew melon and grapes or a softball of ice cream, fried or melting into the crannies of a perfect waffle. Ms. Ma spoke wistfully of Ms. Yip’s early experiments with passionfruit gelatin in the shape of turtles, koi and chrysanthemums; she hopes that will come back.
Service is chatty and unhurried. One evening, the waitress on duty mused about the scarcity of good Malaysian curries in the city. “There are a few other Malaysian places around here,” she said, and sniffed. “I’m not worried.”
