Tut’s Hub Royal Cuisine
Middle Eastern
30-91 Steinway Street,
718-932-8000
At night, the sun blazes over 
a three-story restaurant on Steinway Street in Astoria, Queens, a few blocks south of the strip known as Little Egypt.
Once this was a Wendy’s. Now the solar disc of the god Aten crowns the building, its rays reaching down with human hands. Heads of Hathor, a cow-eared goddess, watch over the sidewalk from atop stocky columns. In lieu of a hostess looms a shining statue of the warrior goddess Sekhmet, whose many names include Giver of Ecstasies, Lady of the Silent Roar Within and One Before Whom Evil Trembles.
But there are “no hookahs, no belly dancers,” said Khaled Abdelhaleem, who opened the restaurant in October. The hieroglyphs, the ibises, the replica of King Tutankhamen’s throne standing on leonine paws, with winged snakes for arms: All this is not so much exoticism as nostalgia and tribute.
Does it feel like an amusement park? Well, yes, and that’s a compliment. I’ve always dreamed of dining in the Temple of Dendur at the Metropolitan Museum of Art; this may be the closest I’ll get. (The décor is the work of Mohammed Amin, an artist and sculptor.)
Note that the surroundings are loftier than the food and the prices. Few dishes rise above $10. Orders are placed at a cash register on the ground floor and delivered to your table on either level, by brisk waitresses who pause just long enough to make sure you’re getting fed.
And the best dishes have roots in the streets, like hawawshi, dough sealed around bristling ground beef and onions, then baked in a wood-fired oven. Mine arrived in a round with thick, chewy raised edges and spots of char; the insides smoked when tugged apart.
For feteer, a glorious crepe with ambitions to pie, dough is flung and spun until strudel-thin and nearly sheer. This is glossed with samna, clarified butter, and folded in layers, like puff pastry or paratha, around the fillings of your choice. Or theirs: I placed my fate in the cooks’ hands and was rewarded with a flaring mixture of ground beef, sausage unnerved by paprika and pastrami house-made in the Egyptian style, closer to basterma and more outspoken. Feteer is dessert, too, loveliest as a simple snowscape of powdered sugar, with custard lurking within.
Mr. Abdelhaleem was born in Sohag, on the western bank of the Nile, and grew up in Alexandria, as did the chef, Mohammed Kamer, known as Mimo. But mysteriously, much of the menu is devoted to American comforts, inviting you to create your own salad, pizza or pasta. (I didn’t.)
Not surprisingly, falafel and shawarma are on hand, along with sprawling platters of grilled lamb chops, nutmeg-laced chicken kebabs and beef-and-lamb koftas that betray a whiff of cinnamon.
Other unlabeled dishes seethe quietly at the steam table behind the counter. This is where I found mombar, rice half-cooked with parsley and cumin and stuffed inside cow-intestine casings, making sausages that were oddly airy and dry.
Kushari suggests a collapsed architecture of rice, lentils, chickpeas and macaroni heaped under crisp broken strands of vermicelli and onions shrunk down to their sugars. The stain of red is tomato sauce, humming with cumin and chiles. Two more sauces are offered on the side: shatta, with detonating chiles, and daqqah, a sour crush of garlic, lemon and vinegar. The more of each mixed in, the better.
The food is halal and no alcohol is served, in keeping with Mr. Abdelhaleem’s vision of the restaurant as a haven for Egyptian families, who tend to commandeer the long tables on the second floor.
On a recent evening, mothers in headscarves scolded sons across the aisle. Teenage boys huddled in corners, faces lit by cellphones, oblivious to the goddesses standing sentinel. Younger children ate chicken fingers, then escaped to the third floor, a former storage space turned playroom, rigged with video games and karaoke.
So history stretches. Cleopatra, the last of the pharaohs, is closer to us in time than to her predecessors who built the pyramids at Giza.
And this month, news broke that hidden chambers have been detected in Tutankhamen’s tomb. The world is still giving up its secrets.
