Pera Soho
Mediterranean, Turkish
54 Thompson Street,
212-878-6305
The Mediterranean small plate puts on downtown garb, becoming more fanciful (and expensive). Open since December, Pera Soho is an outpost of Pera Mediterranean Brasserie, in Midtown, trying to send an edgier message with more black and less blond wood in the décor, and a menu with more spice than the rather bland original.
The new, roomy space, on a relatively isolated corner next to the Thompson Hotel, has kept Pera Soho quiet so far, but its large enclosed patio is drawing crowds. It is a lovely spot, improved by the modern (but not too convoluted) cocktails, like a sour-cherry rickey with rum and rosemary, and a brisk whiskey Collins made with Old Overholt rye and fresh lemon (both $14).
The kitchen recently ditched the most adventurous notes on the menu (having parted ways with the itinerant consulting chef Ryan Skeen); now, the Turkish chef Sezai Celikbas wins points for pulling the focus back to the Eastern Mediterranean. There is less crab meat and sea urchin, more eggplant and chickpeas.
It is possible to have a remarkably good meal here, especially if vegetarians are picking up the check. It would start with the smoked eggplant, whipped with yogurt to a thick foam and served with paper-thin flatbread ($9); whole fried grape leaves with a chili-walnut dip ($9); and fried squid studded with pickled cherry peppers and slivers of spicy chorizo, or the Turkish beef version called soujouk ($15).
Each basket of small sesame-studded pitas would be hot and golden brown — not tired and pale, as they are sometimes. Then, a whole roasted eggplant (a Celikbas specialty, $19) with 
 and a meaty, satisfying texture; and adana kebab, lamb ground with aromatics and chilies to just the right lip-tingling heat ($27). For dessert, a nest of crisp phyllo shreds, laced with butter and honey and topped with a dollop of clotted cream, is the best version of this classic dessert (called kunefe in Turkey) that I’ve had in New York ($11).
Sadly, it has also been possible to have an acutely bad meal here, consisting of underseasoned 
 and brochettes and overpriced wines, served with painful slowness by a jumpy and inexperienced staff. Now that the kitchen is finding its legs and the weather is balmy, the rest of the Pera experience needs to get on board.
