Forcella
Pizza
334 Bowery,
212-466-3300
GIULIO Adriani is still trying to make his mark on New York. Mr. Adriani, an Italian pizzaiolo, seemed ready to teach the city a thing or two about authentic Naples-style pizza when he appeared on the scene last year — here was a man with four pizza world championships under his belt, a blistering-hot wood-burning oven and a chef’s coat with his name stitched on the back just in case you forgot who was working the peel.
What he didn’t have was a good relationship with Olio Pizza e Più, the pizzeria in Greenwich Village that he moved here to start. After parting ways, Mr. Adriani resurfaced at Forcella, a pizzeria with two locations, one in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, that had its debut this summer and a flagship that opened recently in NoHo. Once again, Mr. Adriani has the stage.
Rather, Mr. Adriani has a fryer. If you follow the pizzarazzi, you might know about his montanara ($10), a margherita made with a crust shaped and flash-fried before being topped and finished in the wood-burning oven. Yes, pizza that’s fried and fired. As the kids put it: 
.
The montanara pulls it off. The fryer lends a crisp airiness to the crust, not to mention a thin coat of oil that has the naughty pleasure of street food; the oven gives it color and adds a little smoke.
It’s not the only fried pizza on the menu. There are also two kinds of ripieno, which is folded like a calzone and dropped in the fryer — it comes out of the oil yellow and mottled, resembling the world’s biggest egg roll — and both just miss the mark. In the ripieno classico ($14), a stuffing of 
, smoked mozzarella and ricotta are thrown off by unpleasantly large and chewy pieces of soppressata. As for the ripieno alla scarola ($10), the wilted escarole is clobbered by the olives, capers and anchovies — a good idea undone by a heavy hand.
The more traditional pizzas are also mixed. A margherita regina ($15), with buffalo mozzarella and cherry tomatoes, is a watery mess, while the vomero ($16), a creamy combination of mozzarella, ricotta and ham, is strangely topped with canned corn.
Others fare better. The secondigliano ($14), a four-cheese pizza of mozzarella, provola, gorgonzola and grana, is a gratifying balance of flavors and textures. And the fuorigrotta ($14), mozzarella and pecorino topped with a pile of arugula sitting on thin slices of lemon that are warmed by the heat off the cheese — also spotted at Olio Pizza e Più — tastes like a vacation on the Amalfi Coast.
You can skip the antipasti (unremarkable), the 
 (overdressed) and the desserts (clumsy). Just stick to the middle of the menu.
And if you do, you can have a nice meal. The restaurant is comfortably large and seemingly decorated by somebody who didn’t know how to say no: subway tiles, cinder blocks, pressed tin, exposed brick, marble, chandeliers.
As for the aloof waiters — mostly men, mostly handsome — it’s hard to get their attention, but once you do, it’s as if the stars are shining just for you.
Where is Mr. Adriani while all of this is happening? Rarely at the pizza oven, to judge by recent visits. One night in the middle of service, he silently left the restaurant dressed in a track suit, looking as if he were part of a rapper’s entourage.
He didn’t pause for the cooks or the floor staff; he didn’t stop for anybody sitting at the tables. But there he was at the end of the meal, or rather, his likeness: the check comes clipped to a postcard with a moody black-and-white photo of Mr. Adriani.
The postcard reads “4 time Pizza World Champion.” That was in another city, at another time. Maybe someday the pizzas at Forcella will be championship caliber, too.
Forcella
334 Bowery (Bond Street);
(212) 466-3300; 
.
 Montanara, a margherita that’s fried, then topped and finished in the oven; secondigliano, a four-cheese pizza; and fuorigrotta, mozzarella and pecorino topped with thin slices of lemon and a pile of arugula.
 First courses, $3 to $14; pizzas, $9 to $19; desserts, $6 to 10.
 All major cards.
 Monday to Thursday, noon to 4:30 p.m., and 5:30 to 11 p.m.; Friday, noon to 4:30 p.m., and 5:30 p.m. to midnight; Saturday, noon to midnight; Sunday, noon to 11 p.m.
 Accessible.
 Accepted.
