Parmys Persian Fusion

125 First Avenue,
212-335-0207
How is the English language so impoverished that we do not have a word for the glory of rice brought nearly to a scorch at the bottom of a pot? The Spanish call it socarrat; the Chinese, guo ba. It is graten in Haiti, nurungji in Korea, pegao in Puerto Rico, khao tang in Thailand, xoon in Senegal.
In Persian cuisine, it is tahdig and merits almost its own subgenre, with variations from potatoes to lettuce layered beneath rice in a heavy pan. At 
, which opened in November in the East Village, lavash is the crust, scotched with tiny broken sunrays that turn out to be grains of rice, flattened and bronzed. They pop under the teeth.
Over this is poured gheimeh, a thick, deep red stew of beef, broken-down tomatoes and yellow split peas, saturated with the tang of limes boiled and sun-baked until black and imploding. This is intended as an appetizer; the kitchen has overshot.
The chef, Mojgan Raoufi, had never cooked in a restaurant before, having spent much of her professional life in a hospital lab. She runs Parmys with her younger brother, Amir Raoufi, who previously managed the 
 of 
, a mini-chain owned by their older sister’s family.
Never mind the fusion in the restaurant’s name. The mostly classical recipes come from the Raoufis’ mother, as do the two carpets hanging on a wall, made in their hometown, Tabriz, Iran, which they left in 1978.
Bypass the lifeless pita in the bread basket in favor of sangak, a superlative flatbread traditionally baked on heated rocks, resulting in a pleasing mottle of chewy and crispy spots. (It is made fresh daily at a bakery in Great Neck, N.Y., which has a sizable Iranian Jewish community.)
Turshi, a loose condiment of pickled vegetables that looks like salsa verde, arrives with the bread but is better reserved for the rice and meat. Grilled eggplant is littered with dried mint and garlic chips fried nearly black, under a ring of kashk (whey) with a sourness past yogurt’s. Kuku sabzi, described on the menu as a pie, is closer to a frittata, moist yet springy, with almost more herbs than egg.
The stews are dense and rich: ghormeh sabzi, underscored by bittersweet fenugreek and whole collapsing orbs of black limes; fesenjan, chicken sticky with pomegranate molasses and simmered with crushed walnuts, with an infusion of sweet potato purée for extra body; lamb shank slow-cooked with cinnamon and dunked in a ruddy broth that turns out to be the part everyone wants.
But if you are Persian, you are here for the kebabs. Best are the lamb chops sweetened with a red-wine-vinegar reduction; Cornish game hen soaked in saffron and lemon; and koobideh, a mash of beef ground three times and adrenalized with jalapeños. That shaker on the table is filled with sumac; now is the time to use it.
On my visits, I brought a tough crowd of Iranian descent. My guests approved, but they were exacting about the kebabs. The steak is a little dry, they said. Where is the saffron? And why the wanton strewing of shredded onions? (I nodded supportively, having found almost everything, apart from an unfortunate salmon skewer, delicious.)
The restaurant feels roomy, with walls and pillars of exposed brick and curved mirrors. A television murmurs distractingly behind the bar, often tuned to QVC. The soundtrack vacillates between phantoms of the ’80s (“Careless Whisper,” “Lady in Red”) and Parsi pop.
Among the desserts, pomegranate sorbet and rose-petal gelato bear no trace of their alleged flavors, and both are striped, discordantly, with chocolate sauce. (“There’s the fusion,” one disgruntled diner said.)
But then comes zoolbia bamieh, a swirl of deep-fried dough coated with rosewater-infused honey, alongside the Persian equivalent of doughnut holes. They are almost painfully sweet, which is the point.
When they appeared, my companions, for the first time all evening, said not a word. Then one of them smiled.
“I’m happy now,” she said.
