Arlington Club
American, Steak Houses
1032 Lexington Avenue,
212-249-5700
AS soon as you settle on your order at 
, which can take time because the menu sprawls out like a reclining lawn chair, a basket will land on your table. The basket will hold popovers. The popovers will be huge, steaming hot inside and bronze on top, with a crown of baked Gruyère, Emmental and fontina.
One more thing they will be is gone within minutes. They are that good, as you will remember if you have ever eaten at 
, where a very similar popover kicks off your meal. For anyone who hasn’t tasted one recently, it’s great to see them again at Arlington Club, now two months into its run on the Upper East Side.
And it’s great to see the restaurant’s chef, Laurent Tourondel, again. The founder of BLT Steak and other places embroidered with the same monogram, Mr. Tourondel has not opened a full-scale restaurant in New York City in more than five years.
Born and trained in France, he has an almost diabolical knack for sophisticated crowd pleasers like that popover. When he’s in the zone, as he is most of the time at Arlington Club, his cooking is as ingratiating as it is skillful; it wins your affection right away and then your respect.
I thought I never needed to taste another chef’s take on macaroni and cheese until I tried the one at Arlington Club, and was struck by the way Mr. Tourondel had contrived to give each noodle a golden tip of crust, and had bound them all together in a powerfully smoky Gouda sauce.
When I saw a side dish of truffled gnocchi on the menu, I didn’t expect it to do much more than pad the check. But the little dumplings in cream and melted Parmesan were so delicate that they immediately collapsed on the tongue into yielding parcels of mashed potato.
These dishes and others are the kind of things that make you start plotting your next meal at Arlington Club as you’re calculating the tip.
What they are not, oddly enough, are the kind of things you expect to see at a steakhouse. And a steakhouse is what Arlington Club hopes to be taken for. At times, this desire seems like an acute case of identity crisis.
Certainly, there is nothing at 
 or 
 that recalls the soaring chicken-wire-and-glass prow over the bar that juts out like a steampunk version of one of Hector Guimard’s Paris Metro entrances. A train station motif continues with the enormous clock by the stairs to the upper dining room, and in the twin barrel vaults on the ceiling that amplify the pounding noise. (Softer acoustics are coming soon, Mr. Tourondel said.) The light fixtures were made in Brooklyn, a server told me; so is the seltzer the waiters are always pushing and the half-sour pickles that come with the popovers.
While this suggests a desperate chasing after another borough’s trends, at least the prime beef is classic steakhouse meat, ranched in the Midwest, gorged on corn in its final weeks and dry-aged almost a month. The steaks are seared on a 1,200-degree broiler, rested, then seared again, with effects that varied from night to night. Once, the côte de boeuf for two and the rich and concentrated bone-in rib-eye had magnificent crusts. Other times, the sirloin, filet mignon on the bone and the porterhouse lacked that intense char, but in compensation the interiors were more evenly rosy and juicy.
The steakhouse’s usual supporting players are there, too. The servers wear white cotton, enough of it to rig a schooner. There is a Caesar salad in a dressing sharp with anchovies and garlic. Some other chefs in town should come by to see how it’s done.
Potatoes are handled expertly, in the fries that few mortals will be able to stop eating and in the potatoes Arlington, which are sliced and cooked in clarified butter until it infuses their white centers and browns their edges to a shattering crisp. The customary shrimp cocktail, while not quite at the pinnacle of the form, is better than many. Trying to improve creamed spinach, the kitchen overreaches with an unpleasant dose of nutmeg.
Yet the menu strays far from the steakhouse roster, too.
Do not, I beg you, get involved with the sushi rolls. The rice is cold and tightly packed; the fish is dull. The sushi menu is so out of place that it’s a little embarrassing, in the way of a Hawaiian shirt bought on vacation and worn to the office.
Instead, you might try an excellent, if highly un-
-ish, red snapper fillet in an electrifying pool of black vinegar, with ginger and chiles for added emphasis. Or, in a less forceful Asian mode, the black bass steamed in a tranquilly aromatic broth of coconut and lime.
Whatever the theme, the neighborhood is clearly buying it. There are boys-night-out tables, girls-night-out tables, tables of families with preteen boys in camel-hair blazers that allow room to grow, and, one evening, a man with a skull printed on his shirt who was cheerfully dragging on an electronic cigarette.
They all look delighted to be right where they are, except maybe the preteen boys and the people by the bar who are being made to wait a very long time for a table. If you happen to look over at the velvet rope that keeps the unseated out of the dining room, you may see their resentful eyes willing you to skip dessert.
Turn your back and order a crêpe soufflé, a puffy sweet omelet dusted with powdered sugar and served with warm berries. The size of a deflated football, it is a dessert for hard-working French country people of another century. Miraculously, it waits on Lexington Avenue today for modern in-box cobblers and tweetsmiths.
It has no business in a steakhouse, of course. But like many such things at Arlington Club, it’s memorably good. The restaurant doesn’t know how to follow the script, but its improvisations are inspired.
The identity crisis may really belong to the steakhouse itself, which increasingly seems like a self-conscious relic, the way Westerns did in the 1970s. How many diners today really want to eat a pound of red meat at one sitting? And with what we know today about its effects on the environment and on health (ours and that of the animals), the words cornfed beef do not stir the appetite the way they used to.
It’s become harder to believe the myth of the steakhouse. Arlington Club presents the old religion, but it has plenty of other gods on offer for the nonbelievers. The restaurant may not know what to call itself, but it knows what it’s doing.
