Baoburg
Asian, French, Spanish
126 North Sixth Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn,
718-782-1445
Here come the devils on horseback, that relic of dinner parties past: prunes and dates cowled in bacon and thrust onto skewers, chewy, crunchy, sweet and salty at once. Except that these devils are in Japanese garb, adorned with nitsume, the dark, sticky sauce that traditionally accompanies eel; squiggles of extra-tangy Kewpie mayonnaise; and translucent bonito flakes like blanched confetti.
This isn’t globe-trotting for its own sake. Mayo adds creaminess, while bonito and nitsume intensify the sweet-salty hostilities. The dish has whimsy and logic, and is a fine introduction to the personal geography of Suchanan Aksornnan, the chef at Baoburg, in Williamsburg, Brooklyn.
Ms. Aksornnan grew up in Chiang Rai, in northern Thailand. At age 15, she came to New York and started cooking alongside her mother, Amornrat Fukuda, at 
, which opened its first location a decade ago — two doors down, as it happens, from where Baoburg now stands. (Ms. Aksornnan’s father, Futoshi Fukuda, owns 
, the restaurant in between, with which Baoburg shares a restroom, in familial fashion.)
Studies at the French Culinary Institute and stints at 
 and 
 followed. Perhaps accordingly, Baoburg’s idiosyncratic menu owes as much to classical European technique as it does to Ms. Aksornnan’s cross-cultural upbringing.
A slow-cooked duck leg tilts over crispy Chinese egg noodles, branching like coral, on a bed of chewy Italian linguine muddled with Thai yellow curry. The top noodles shatter, the bottom noodles slither, and the curry is gentle but expansive, forgoing chile heat for simple warmth.
Fish sauce and oyster sauce infiltrate orbs of ground lamb and jasmine rice, grilled until nubbled with crispy bits. On a larger scale, lamb stew is simmered and saturated for six hours with shrimp paste, fish sauce, ginger, lemon grass and galangal, then layered with nearly burned sticky rice, a bulge of poached egg and sprinkles of ground chicharrones: a carnivore’s sundae.
At times the fusion is subtle: empanadas filled with curry, evoking their Malaysian cousins, curry puffs; sushi rice thickened with cream, Parmesan, butter and chicken stock into an almost indecently velvety risotto; the faintest trace of lemon grass and kaffir lime in an otherwise straightforward rendition of gambas al ajillo.
But the kitchen can be heavy-handed, as with duck breast over ramen noodles — borrowed from Dad’s restaurant next door — swamped by a strangely sweet consommé, and crostini whose topping of lardo and mushrooms is obliterated by apricot marmalade.
And some plates feel like filler, crowd-pleasers to pad out the menu: pork ribs relaxed by a marinade of cider and Coca-Cola, and chicken wings glazed with maple syrup and soy. Inevitably there are blackened brussels sprouts, getting chummy with chorizo, pistachios and Granny Smith apples — excellent, and available at any of a dozen New American restaurants about town.
There are no actual bao at Baoburg, at least not the bao that New Yorkers have come to know in the form of pork belly buns at 
 and 
. (Ms. Aksornnan is known as Bao Bao, hence the restaurant’s name.) Here the steamed Chinese buns appear only as a base for crostini and a substitute for (and improvement on) toast in a hyped-up version of eggs Benedict at brunch. (In another quirk of the restaurant, brunch is served daily at lunchtime.)
Baoburg is barely the size of a shipping container, and it almost looks like one, with a facade of aluminum siding already starting to rust. But inside, the ambience is more homey than industrial, with a banana plant listing in a corner and, by the kitchen, an improvised chandelier of Mason jars.
Desserts — standards like chocolate cake, flan, the occasional overfurnished crepe — could use some of the earlier dishes’ daring. Crème brûlée comes with creamed corn, a favorite in Southeast Asia (even McDonald’s in Thailand makes a creamed-corn pie) and the liveliest part of the dish. “Tamales” of banana and sticky rice are suffused with coconut milk cooked down into dulce de leche, yet taste merely, flatly, of sugar.
There’s a quick fix. Steal some of the dark chocolate ganache that accompanies the tiny churros and apply it liberally to the bananas and sticky rice. You are mixing things up, crossing boundaries, but I have a feeling that Ms. Aksornnan won’t mind.
126 North Sixth Street (Berry Street), Williamsburg, Brooklyn; 718-782-1445; 
 Bacon-wrapped prunes and dates takoyaki; grilled lamb rice ball skewer; gambas al ajillo; brussels sprouts; duck confit linguine; braised lamb shoulder stew.
 $4 to $20, cash only.
 Daily for brunch and dinner.
 Accepted.
 The entrance is level with the sidewalk. The restroom has a handrail.
 
