Aldea
New American, Portuguese
31 West 17th Street,
212-675-7223
GEORGE MENDES is hardly the first chef to toggle, in the space of a relatively compact menu, between elaborate and straightforward impulses. And his new restaurant, Aldea, isn’t alone in presenting some dishes defined by their look-at-me artistry and others that simply go for the gut.
But while most chefs and restaurants seem, in the end, to favor one school of thinking and eating over another, Mr. Mendes and Aldea are unusually ambidextrous, as comfortable whipping up ethereal foams as scattering hunks of pork anywhere they can be defensibly scattered.
The cooking is precious, lusty, ultramodern, rustic and a host of other adjectives that don’t normally squeeze together but find themselves in a tight, mostly happy clutch here. Although Aldea has a clean, sleek and relatively spare look, it has a much more complex taste.
One minute you’re nibbling on crisp pig’s ears. The next you’re carefully maneuvering your spoon under a translucent, quivering orb of concentrated mushroom broth — one of those liquid ravioli that the Spanish alchemist Ferran Adrià made famous — in an avant-garde consommé.
The entree in front of you is a go-for-broke hillock of rice with duck cracklings and black olives. The entree in front of your companion is a refined, butter-soft fillet of wild bass that has been poached in a technique similar to sous vide and tucked under a billowing nimbus made from Arbois and air.
For dessert there are doughnuts (though they’re labeled “little dreams”). But there is also “chocolate in textures,” a dark tableau that seems as ready for exhibition as for ingestion.
The ethnic guidepost for all of this is Iberian, specifically Portuguese, because that’s Mr. Mendes’s heritage, and because Portuguese cuisine, I suppose, was awaiting its modernization, at least in New York, where it hadn’t yet met the fate of other foods.
Spanish, French, Thai, Chinese — all of these and more have been put through the Manhattan culinary wringer, coming out the other side with some traditions intact and with generous, often specious measures of raw tuna, foie gras and pork belly folded in. New Yorkers want restaurants to spirit them far, far away, but not so far that they can’t glance over their shoulders and catch sight of a molten chocolate cake.
So as Mr. Mendes tugs them toward Lisbon, he cushions the journey with faddishness and trusted friends. The current local affinity for the slow-poached egg is reflected in two starters: one that presents a mix of egg, potato and salt cod in an eggshell — it’s like a brandade mousse — and another that combines egg, bacon, peas and summer truffle into a sort of porridge of the gods.
He puts a hanger steak on the menu — and, gratuitously, a sunny-side-up egg over the beef. I say gratuitously because the beef is also paired with “bone marrow-onion marmalade” and a potato and oxtail terrine. Mr. Mendes’s usually intelligent, intriguing and highly skilled work is undercut at times by a tendency to overwork his dishes.
Before Aldea he cooked at Tocqueville, and before that at Wallsé and at Bouley, a restaurant whose influence can be seen in his fondness for sous-vide techniques and pliant, silky textures.
He knows his stuff and it shows — as much in the simple creations as in the ornate ones. He does little more to Maine scallops than score them and then sear them on a plancha. And they’re flawless.
At Aldea Mr. Mendes, 36, is the principal owner as well as the chef — it’s his baby through and through. Its name is a Portuguese word for village. Its look is muted but lovely, with a sense of sea and sky in the blue and white palette of a narrow two-story space with an open kitchen in the back and slender birches recessed into the walls.
The structure of the menu plays things relatively safe, presenting such popular categories as snacks — called “petiscos” here — and charcuterie before moving on to appetizers and mains. Even so, the lineup of dishes is relatively succinct, and in light of that, one or two too many miss their mark.
The citrus foam and ginger over littleneck clams didn’t draw out or frame their flavor, but rather masked it. For all the technique lavished on the mushroom consommé, the results were wan.
That surprised me, because other dishes were intense flavor bombs: shrimp à la plancha made shrimp-ier with a concentrated shrimp-head jus; the intensely ducky, paella-esque rice, embedded with chorizo to boot; a superb goat entree in which crisp flaps of goat skin and tender squiggles of goat liver played robust parts.
Had Aldea opened a year ago, it would certainly be charging more than $27 for that goat and $20 for that duck. This restaurant is something of a deal, straight through desserts, one of the best of which was a “strawberry tasting” with a semifreddo, a sorbet and a hefty wedge of shortcake — all for $9.
That generosity made the stinginess of wine pours befuddling, but then Aldea’s wine situation is slightly frustrating all in all, with too many young reds and by-the-glass selections often bereft of anything you’re really itching to drink.
But there’s plenty to eat, whether you’re hungry for something delicate or blunt. It establishes Aldea as a restaurant worth trying, and Mr. Mendes as a chef worth keeping an eye on.
**
31 West 17th Street; (212) 675-7223, 
.
A sleek, slender two-story space with white birches along the walls and an open kitchen in the back.
 Moderate.
 Farm egg with salt cod; coconut-curry soup with cuttlefish; peas, egg and bacon; shrimp alhinho; baby goat; rice with duck confit; scallops; strawberry tasting; caramel brioche.
 Medium-length, international and accessibly priced, though not up to the level of the food.
 “Small bites” and appetizers, $6 to $17; entrees, $20 to $27; desserts, $8 to $10.
From 5:30 p.m. to 11 p.m. Monday through Thursday and to midnight Friday and Saturday.
Call about two weeks ahead for prime times.
 All major cards.
 Accessible entrance through building to the left; elevator to second-floor dining room and accessible restroom.
 Ratings range from zero to four stars and reflect the reviewer’s reaction to food, ambience and service, with price taken into consideration. Menu listings and prices are subject to change.
