Prospect
American
773 Fulton Street ,
718-596-6826
Here lies a grape, or what was once a grape, before it was rolled in powdered sugar, egg whites and grape juice, then left in a dehydrator until the frosting hardened into a shell and the grape inside deflated, becoming almost a raisin.
This is but one element in a dessert that includes a wedge of pine-nut tart suffused with “blond” chocolate, white chocolate simmered until the milk solids caramelize; a rectangle of candied puff pastry topped with Muscat grape sorbet; a drift of white chocolate powder; and small puff-pastry orbs fattened with white chocolate crème fraîche.
The desserts at 
, which opened in September in Fort Greene, Brooklyn, are neither afterthoughts nor tangents. As conceived by Annika Loureiro, the pastry chef, they are an extension, and possibly the fullest realization, of the themes and intent of the preceding meal. (They are also, as it happens, delicious.)
That Prospect even has a pastry chef (a rare sighting these days at small Brooklyn restaurants, where chefs, constrained by budget or space, often try to muddle through on their own) signals the restaurant’s ambition.
Kyle McClelland, the executive chef and an owner, and Vinson Petrillo, the chef de cuisine, construct not so much dishes as culinary terraria. Tiny batons of snow crab meat slant over smears of avocado, alongside truncated spring rolls made with brik dough; truncheons of octopus loll among confit artichokes and pepper-sheathed nubs of chorizo, over jags of piquillo pepper purée that invoke a written 
.
At times, plates are more beautiful than flavorful, as with a throng of beets and radishes, tufts still on or root tips crooking up, atop a red swath of pickled beet purée and a “soil” of hazelnut flour and dehydrated rye bread. Raspberries show up, too, packed with Meyer lemon gel, as do panko-crusted croquettes of Fleur Verte, a chèvre coated with thyme, tarragon and pink peppercorns. It seems ungrateful to note a dearth of salt.
The main courses, apart from a forceful rack of lamb with a cooling antipode of smoked yogurt, are more obvious and less exciting, like a diffident halibut or heavy ricotta-and-spinach gnudi. Crispy suckling pig is overpowered by Medjool dates injected with peanut butter and wrapped in bacon — a canapé from another, rowdier party.
Perhaps the wisest way to approach Prospect is to bypass the regular menu for the more focused five-course tasting, which on a recent evening featured seared foie gras with a liquid center, an earthy gush juxtaposed with delicate hamachi and uni; duck, aged for more than a month in-house, haunted by a black-garlic reduction like a leaking shadow; and Wagyu tongue, brined overnight, cooked sous-vide for 24 hours, then shaved into broad ribbons and laid over pickled ramps and brush strokes of violet mustard. The tongue came flanked by two dainty circles of pumpernickel with pats of horseradish mascarpone, as if honoring its origins as a humble deli sandwich.
The handsome dining room is divided between bar and banquettes, with a “chef’s table” (really a counter) at the back by the open kitchen. The chalkboard walls of the bathroom encourage graffiti, which might on a given night include a sketch of the Wu-Tang Clan bat, with the tag “Protect ya neck.” Prospect is not exactly a neighborhood restaurant, with close to half the appetizers hovering around $20. Yet here are the neighbors, not a suit in sight, just the occasional bow tie and newsboy cap.
It is the right audience to appreciate the geeky whimsy of the desserts, like a panna cotta with basil sorbet and a strawberry consommé poured tableside, or a dark chocolate cremeux perfumed with Cynar, a bitter artichoke-based liqueur that, confoundingly, makes the dark chocolate taste less bitter. Orbiting the cremeux are raspberry sorbet and a gelato that started out life as creamy chocolate milk; skinny wands of condensed-milk biscuits, dipped in white chocolate raspberry ganache; and a chocolate cookie rippled like a flag caught midflap, created by brushing the batter over a silicon mold popped inside out.
This last adornment results in a lot of burned fingers in the kitchen, according to Ms. Loureiro. It is worth it.
