Talde
Asian
369 Seventh Avenue,
347-916-0031
CHARGING into a restaurant during its first weeks of life used to be an amateur move, guaranteeing long waits, clueless service and food that could generously be described as a work in progress. Diners with any wisdom and self-control waited a few months, or even years, while the place hit its stride.
But now, restaurants have to stun from the start. They open amid a frenzy of media attention from bloggers, Yelpers, tweeters, reporters and critics. Then, before long, the reviews are all in, opinions are set and the swarm moves on. It takes, at most, a couple of months, and smart restaurateurs and chefs work at the top of their abilities until it’s over.
All too often, that period turns out to be the golden age. For many chefs, there are books to write, television deals to chase and concepts to finance. Restaurants that were in the prime of life at two months old begin to slouch into middle age before their first birthday.
Several aspects of this accelerated life cycle seemed to be on display this year at 
, which opened in January in Park Slope, Brooklyn. About a month into its run, the dining room ticked along briskly, and the cooking, which could be called pan-Asian if that didn’t sound so alarming, was smart and skillful. On a visit this fall, the service seemed to have lost its way and the flavors had grown vague.
Dale Talde was in the kitchen that initial night. A veteran of Vong in Chicago and Buddakan in New York before his time on “Top Chef,” Mr. Talde has a well-polished knack for translating Asian dishes for popular tastes. He has reimagined the Vietnamese dish cha ca la Vong, for instance, as a do-it-yourself fish taco. A whole branzino was roasted inside a banana leaf in a tomato turmeric jam. We pulled the fish apart with tongs, then piled it onto steamed moo shoo pancakes and outfitted it with fronds of dill and leaves of cilantro and basil. The herbs made the dish.
We rapidly put away a plate of sliders filled with Filipino sausage or golden fried fluke with a well-seasoned garlic mayonnaise. (Avoiding slider fatigue, the menu calls them Hawaiian bread buns.) And we smiled as we ate Mr. Talde’s Korean fried chicken, savoring the loud crunch on the coating, the sneaky tang of kimchi in the yogurt sauce and the pop of juicy green grapes scattered around the plate for relief.
Compared with the soaring theatrics of Buddakan, Talde is spartan, a long white rectangle enlivened here and there by elaborate 19th-century mahogany carvings of Orientalist motifs like elephants and dragons. Much of the atmosphere that evening was provided by John Bush and David Massoni, Mr. Talde’s business partners, who stopped by each table, noting that draft beer was available in half-pints, or suggesting a bottle from the inexpensive and intelligently chosen wine list.
On another night more than six months later, I never saw Mr. Talde, Mr. Massoni or Mr. Bush. This wasn’t surprising, perhaps, because they had recently opened a place called 
. A bar with a pool table and an emphasis on the Johnny Cash songbook, Pork Slope offers outstanding tater tots, a breakfast-sausage-and-melted-cheese sandwich and other food that has a way of moving from the table into your mouth without any conscious volition on your part.
Back at Talde on the night in question, though, nothing was going right. We waited for food, and kept waiting as diners all around us sat down, ordered, finished their appetizers and moved on to their main courses. About 40 minutes later, our server finally noticed our empty table.
A few more minutes passed before we received a plate of squid and a hasty apology. “The kitchen lost your ticket,” our server said. “Stuff blows around back there, so it blew away.”
By then we were about as hungry as it is possible to be inside a restaurant. Yet as more plates arrived, we finished almost nothing. The squid, billed as “charred lemon grass calamari 
,” had no lemon grass flavor and no char, either; parts of the squid were still gelatinous.
Even less satisfying was the pad Thai with bacon and fried oysters. The noodles were so sweet that more than half a lime’s worth of juice couldn’t bring them back, the bacon was overbearing, and the oysters had no flavor except what they picked up while being fried to a listless shade of beige.
This was clearly not the same Talde that had showed so much promise last winter, but that restaurant did reappear on a final visit, when the staff by the door immediately jumped into action, buzzing with that nervous energy produced by the sight of a restaurant critic.
From a table right in front of the open kitchen, it was clear that Mr. Talde was not on the line that night. And then, after about 15 minutes, he walked in and took his place at the pass. There he stayed until the last plate had been brought to our table. Then he retreated to a spot by the bar with Mr. Massoni, who had materialized in the dining room at around the same time.
The cooking was back to its old, confident self. A fluke fillet was topped with a wonderfully complex paste of fermented black beans and brown butter; a spiral of chow fun noodles with pork and mustard greens had a springiness and a bit of crunch that were close to ideal; rib-eye in a black pepper-caramel sauce made sweet, sticky, slightly inauthentic stir-fried beef seem like a fine idea again.
After the table was cleared, we ordered the pad Thai. Our server walked to Mr. Talde, and Mr. Talde walked from the bar to the kitchen pass. Once the pad Thai had been delivered to our table, Mr. Talde left the kitchen again.
The bacon still felt like overkill. But the sauce on the noodles was lively, and the fried crust on the oysters was truly crisp.
Maybe Mr. Talde saw that meal as another competition to be won. Or maybe the presence of a critic had recreated the atmosphere of Talde’s opening weeks. If so, then Mr. Talde and his partners should be able to keep conjuring that environment every night. It would be good for their customers, and a welcome return to the way restaurants used to operate.
