Günter Seeger NY
American
641 Hudson Street,
646-657-0045
It’s complicated to praise someone whose confidence already seems to be reinforced with steel and clad in granite. It’s even more complicated in the case of 
, whose confidence is the source of both his success in the kitchen and his occasional capacity for sabotaging himself in the dining room.
Even the believers in Mr. Seeger’s lyrical cooking, and I became one the first time I ate at his new restaurant in the West Village, have noted that his insistence on following his vision does not always work to his advantage. This has been a theme since his time in Atlanta, first at the Dining Room at the Ritz-Carlton, Buckhead, and then at his own restaurant, called Seeger’s.
Christiane Lauterbach, an admirer from the moment she tasted his red cabbage (“Aha!” she remembers thinking. “A German who doesn’t cook like a German!”), 
 in 1999 that his refusal to hire a parking valet at Seeger’s cost him money. Each time it poured, customers canceled their reservations so they wouldn’t have to get wet running from the lot to the front door.
“Ja,” Mr. Seeger told her. “I do it my way.”
Those who wanted to eat at 
 when it opened on Hudson Street in May had to do it his way, too. Instead of offering reservations, the restaurant sold tickets for $185 a person, service included.
Paying for a meal in full up front always gives me the feeling that the restaurant is worried I’m going to try to dine and dash. I put up with it, grumblingly, only for restaurants that have limited seatings and offer something I can’t get anywhere else. What did Günter Seeger NY have, besides Mr. Seeger himself, who hasn’t had a restaurant since Seeger’s closed nine years ago?
New Yorkers griped. Then, in a sign that he has learned to bend a little, Mr. Seeger dropped the ticket scheme. Now he offers reservations, with a $100-a-person fee for cancellations within 48 hours. The restaurant’s website also shows the day’s menu, now priced at $148 before tip and tax. It’s easier paying for dinner once you’ve put away 10 to 12 courses and a bottle of German riesling from Günter Seeger NY’s impressive stash. But it isn’t quite easy enough to keep you from wondering just what you’re getting for the money.
One thing it doesn’t buy you is a lot of fabrics in the dining room. Velvety clusters of roses sit on the bare tables; the uncarpeted floors clatter with the footsteps of servers pacing back and forth; the brick walls are painted white and echo with stiff formalities.
“Chef wants you to feel like he’s welcoming you into his home,” we were told one night. When you go to dinner there, do you have to call him Chef, too?
This deeply undomestic dining room is overshadowed by the immense stainless-steel kitchen in the back, where Mr. Seeger and his crew are on display, moving soundlessly under lights of operating-room intensity.
With every detail, Günter Seeger NY tells you that the food is the whole show. At these prices, it had better be close to perfect.
And on my first two meals, it was. The cooking is deeply expressive — expressive of the season and of Mr. Seeger’s focused, disciplined style. He doesn’t try for bizarre juxtapositions. When you’re surprised by his cooking, it’s because the voice of the ingredients is coming through more clearly than you’re used to.
Chilled pea soup had a beguiling, toasted depth, and even the garnish was delicious, an open pea pod stretched across the rim of a shot glass. On another night, the soup was lemon cucumber, and it was refreshing in the way you want a gin and tonic to be, or an afternoon shower.
A squash blossom twisted around delicate lobster mousse was served with a distinctive squash blossom pesto, crunchy with pistachios and seasoned, thrillingly, with saffron.
Mr. Seeger welcomed the return of matjes herring with an early-summer tartare that was bright with apples, cucumbers and the piercing taste of ginger. Abalone was quickly grilled, sliced and sent back to its shell with dashi, briny threads of sea bean and a live-wire dab of yuzukosho.
There were moments of theatricality. One night, a server ferried a wheel of Parmigiano-Reggiano the size of a wedding cake to the table. “This is your cheese course,” he said, then toted it away, returning a short time later with a plate dusted with grated cheese and grated pistachios and slivers of candied citron. It was very good.
Mr. Seeger’s people like to say that he draws up the menus while wandering the farmers’ market each day. Like the bit about welcoming you into his home, this is largely fiction. He didn’t find abalone or Parmigiano-Reggiano in a New York City Greenmarket.
Well, who cares whether he gets his inspiration in Union Square or while talking on the phone to his importer: The point is that he knows where to find ingredients that speak far more eloquently than any server reeling off prepared talking points.
After two dinners, I was as convinced of the excellence of Mr. Seeger’s cooking as he seems to be. I knew the sterility of the dining room would keep some people away, and I wasn’t sure anybody should have to pay quite so much for dinner, but the cooking had a finesse that’s exciting to find because it’s so rare.
Then, in my last meal, nothing was quite as exquisite. Mr. Seeger’s opening move that night was a ball of sweet, flat-tasting langoustine ice cream with caviar and a fragment of sea urchin. I love langoustines, and hated to see them end up like this. It was the first dish I’d had that might have come from Mr. Seeger’s recipe files from the ’90s rather than straight from his heart.
Later in the meal, that great squash-blossom pesto came back, this time with a small European sole the size of my hand. It had spent both too much time on the grill and too little. Crosshatches of char overpowered the sole’s exquisite flavor, and yet the thickest part of the fish clung to the spine, not fully cooked.
For all his confidence, Mr. Seeger must be feeling a bit exposed right now. His future in New York City is riding on a restaurant that’s both brilliant and off-putting. Before it opened, Mr. Seeger 
, “The food will be simplistic, but also technically perfect.”
That’s a cool trick when it works. When it doesn’t, there’s nowhere to hide.
