House of Inasal
Philippine
65-14 Roosevelt Avenue,
718-429-0709
“Unlimited rice”: It is a siren call. At 
, a Filipino restaurant that opened last year in Woodside, Queens, it’s the happy surprise waiting on the first page of the menu, announced by a speech bubble cut out of kraft paper and taped in the margin.
There are caveats (after 5 p.m., Tuesday to Friday, if you buy the first order of rice), but for certain diners — and I am one — it beats dollar-oyster happy hour and bottomless sangria. Loosely translated, it means make yourself at home.
That’s easy to do in a dining room that feels spacious and sleepy, operating at the pace of a desultory ceiling fan. Light filters from lamps veiled in Capiz shells. On the walls are stark silhouette decals of power lines frilled with birds, a whimsical reference to the view afforded when eating from street carts, according to the chef, Ricardo Aguirre, 29, who owns the restaurant with his older sister, Emme.
From the streets come kwek-kwek, gaudy orange balls that suggest doughnut holes left too long in the fryer. In fact, they are quail eggs, hard-boiled, shelled, battered (with annatto for that Crayola tint) and deep-fried. They arrive tumbled, like fish and chips, on a sheet of vellum printed with 19th-century British classified ads, with flat wooden sticks for piercing. The outside is crisp and seems to vaporize instantly; the inside is dense and almost gooey, as if the yolk had attained a texture close to that of honey.
Mr. Aguirre grew up in Iloilo City, in the Visayas region of the Philippines, and moved to New Jersey at age 9. He started cooking at his father’s two turo-turo (cafeteria-style) restaurants in Jersey City, attended the 
 and worked the line at 
 and 
. It’s a career trajectory that could have easily led him to selling haute free-range kwek-kwek from a 
 stall. Instead, he’s delivering straightforward comfort food — unmodernized, unexalted — with no concessions to Western palates, in a stretch of Queens whose growing Filipino population has earned it the nickname Little Manila.
So here are cool slices of eggplant strewn with salted duck egg, unfathomably briny, its yolk shading past yellow and looking half-curdled. And lumpiang sariwa, a kind of unfried egg roll under a peanut sauce riddled with crispy garlic yet as sweet as cola. On my visits, nearly every table had an order of isaw, pork intestines on a skewer, the meat chopped into spongy tabs and blackened until it sweated smoke.
These are exciting difficulties. But there are dishes with more immediate pleasures: a thick omelet mottled with ground pork and eggplant; a hash of milkfish, onions, lemon juice and Maggi seasoning (a staple of the Filipino home kitchen), brought smoking and hissing on a cast-iron plate, with whole Thai bird chiles on top. A barbecue sauce of lemongrass, ginger and Sprite cooks down to a sweet lacquer around chicken inasal, a Visayan specialty. La Paz batchoy, a soup born in Mr. Aguirre’s native city, loads rich pork-bone broth with egg noodles, roasted pork, dark lengths of liver and shards of chicharrón that somehow never lose their crunch.
Breakfast is served all day, a grand assembly called silog, which includes a hillock of garlic fried rice, two over-easy eggs (conjoined), atchara (pickled papaya, carrots and onions, gratifyingly funky), suka (spiced vinegar) and meat — perhaps tapa, thin slices of beef cured and seared, with caramelly edges, or tocino, a hyper-bacon of pork saturated with pineapple juice and banana ketchup, left juicy and tender. Better yet is a glorious bowl of arroz caldo, akin to congee, a porridge of equal parts sticky rice and long-grain, swollen from soaking up chicken broth.
At the end there is Mr. Aguirre’s take on Latin American tres leches cake, made with young coconut and neon green from pandan paste. It’s soaked in four kinds of milk — coconut, evaporated, condensed and half-and-half — each infused with pandan leaves for that mercurial half flavor, half fragrance, gesturing toward grass, jasmine and almonds. Fresh coconut curls on top; scattered pinipig, pounded sticky rice, pops like Rice Krispies. If only this, too, had no limit.
