Toloache
Mexican
251 West 50th Street,
212-581-1818
IT is difficult to eat well in the theater district, even if you’re in on the game and have Esca on speed dial.
Joe Allen is a treat after a show, for lounging amid the posters advertising first-night flops. Sardi’s is best during one, empty and sweet, with Rialto lawyers arguing Guettel versus Sondheim over cannelloni au gratin.
You can do well with charred meat at Frankie & Johnnie’s, or with fried shrimp at Gallagher’s, along with a steakhouse pour from the bar. For fine French home cooking, there’s Chez Napoleon. For garden-party tarrying, there’s Italian at Barbetta. A curry at Pam Real Thai? Sure, though you could end up looking like Elphaba if you’re not used to the heat.
But the bulk of the pretheater restaurant scene is grim banquet food on polyester tablecloths: block after block of steam-table pastas and Diet Cokes; industrial salads; not-from-scratch chicken dishes; pound after pound of Sysco fries. Come in from Tinton Falls to see “Chicago” with friends, and it can be hard, if you haven’t conjugated all the malarkey or know someone who has, to figure out quite where to eat.
Here is one place: Toloache, a Mexican bistro on 50th Street off Eighth Avenue. It opened in 2007 and looks terrible from the street, a cube-shaped restaurant under spectacular green-and-purple neon signage. You could easily walk by the place chuckling at the awning reading “Bistro Mexicano.”
But nothing on Broadway is ever what it seems. Toloache is worth a second look. Julian Medina, the chef and an owner, is from Mexico City, classically trained in the kitchen, with a rich history in New York. He is a graduate of Richard Sandoval’s restaurants, a former kitchen boss at Maya and Pampano. He was the founding chef at Zocalo. (With Giovanny Campos, he also has the terrifically loud Yerba Buena restaurants downtown.) He is a marvelous interpreter of guacamole, of ceviche, of finishing-school tacos and wood-oven quesadillas. In Toloache (pronounced toe-lo-AH-chay, a kind of Mexican flowering herb), he has built up a nice restaurant.
One of the great pleasures of the summer season in New York is to sit  at its comfortable tiled bar, drinking a fine house margarita or a tequila off the restaurant’s long and luxurious list, while eating a bowl of guacamole with the assistance of some tortilla chips, fresh, warm and salty. Follow this with a few tacos or quesadillas, cold beers and ceviche (the best is yellowfin tuna tuned up with jalapeño, Vidalia onion, radish and watermelon, in a dressing of Key lime juice). Suddenly, taking Aunt Miriam to “Phantom” doesn’t seem all that much of a chore.
Three versions of the guacamole are offered. There is plain, of course, a fairly traditional mixture of roughly mashed avocado with some onion and Serrano chilies, a small dice of tomatoes and a sprinkling of cilantro leaves. A more fiery recipe offers chipotle and more tomatoes, a hint of queso fresco, some red onions.
Best, though diners can happily argue the point, is the fruit-spiked version, in which the avocado slips around on bits of ripe mango and peach, with studs of pomegranate seeds here and there, the occasional crisp sliver of apple, of Vidalia onion. Thai basil offers a note of grace; habanero pepper a hint of sweet, serious fire. (A sampler plate brings all three.)
The quesadillas are prepared in an ample wood-assisted oven in the middle of the dining room. It is the restaurant’s hearth and centerpiece. Two stand out, though all are fairly strong in flavor and execution: a manchego one with black truffles that takes on a doubly funky note from the addition of huitlacoche, a corn fungus; and a sweet and fiery shrimp-and-Chihuahua-cheese number with pineapple salsa and chiles de árbol.
Tacos are likewise elegant and modern, fairly spare. You might try one with a filling of braised veal cheeks, onion, cilantro and a salsa spiked with chiles de árbol; another with maitake mushrooms and more huitlacoche, cactus and queso fresco. Some diners are keen on the Oaxacan-style filling of nutty dried grasshoppers with onion and jalapeño; more-vanilla tastes will run toward guajillo-marinated pork with grilled pineapple, or fried tilapia with jicama slaw and guacamole. The carne asada, with its grilled and salty skirt steak, is splendid.
Entrees — what the restaurant calls platos principales — are less successful, too large and unwieldy for joy. Braised short ribs with an ancho glaze and celery-root purée, for instance, is muddy and wan; salmon with more of that huitlacoche-maitake mixture has almost the texture of pudding. You can do well, though, with a grilled skirt steak served with a cheese enchilada drenched in credible mole, with potato gratin (huh?) and a dab of guacamole on the side, or with shredded suckling pig from the oven, with a habanero-sour orange salsa, cactus avocado and a chicharron-spiked salad.
Or simply stick to guac, tacos and quesadillas, and tweak the end of your meal with dessert — crepes with caramelized goat’s milk, Marcona almonds and banana ice cream is best, though many tables appear to stick to chocolate, scooping up a warm molten cake with dulce de leche ice cream before calling for the check.
Reservations are an absolute must at Toloache, at least if you’re on your way to or from a theater. The restaurant has, in the three years since opening, built up a loyal following of customers who pack its main dining room and mezzanine in the minutes between 6 and 7:30 p.m.
One reason for that is the food, of course, those entrees excepted.
But it is also the service the restaurant provides, kindly and attentive to a degree that would be notable even in a business charging much more. The crew on the floor of Toloache works as well together as a bunch of old Broadway hands. They put on a good show, worth attending with a margarita in hand.
★
251 West 50th Street (off Eighth Avenue), theater district; (212)  581-1818, 
.
If bistros were Mexican, and vin rouge were made with tequila and lime juice, Toloache could be in Paris.
Crashingly loud during the pretheater rush.
Guacamoles, hamachi ceviche, quesadilla with shrimp, tacos, quesadilla with huitlacoche and black truffles.
 Limited, though a selection of roughly 100 tequilas makes up the difference.
 Appetizers, $9 to $17; entrees, $20 to $27.
Daily, 11:30 a.m. to 3 p.m.;  daily bar menu, 3 to 5 p.m.; Sunday to Thursday, 5 to 11 p.m.; Friday and Saturday, 5 to 11:30 p.m.
Call at least two weeks in advance for pretheater reservations.
 All major cards.
The restaurant has two levels, one accessible from the street, the other up a steep flight of stairs. Restrooms are on street level, but not large.
 Ratings range from zero to four stars and reflect the reviewer’s reaction to food, ambience and service, with price taken into consideration. Menu listings and prices are subject to change.
 
