Lao Dong Bei
Chinese
44-09 Kissena Boulevard,
718-539-4100
I NEVER KNEW that sweet-and-sour pork could taste good.
The American-Chinese versions that I ate growing up had nubs of meat so thickly cocooned in batter that their porcine origins were undetectable. They came drenched in vermilion, the sauce a toppled neon sunset seeping across the plate. They tasted of Jolly Ranchers and Robitussin.
At Lao Dong Bei, which specializes in the 
 of northeast China (formerly known as Manchuria), it is pork that dominates the dish, not sauce. Lean pork loin is cut into thin leaves, steeped in soy and rice wine, slapped in a potato-starch batter, then fried. The sauce is a swift business of garlic, ginger, rice vinegar and sugar. It sticks but does not soak, so the pork stays crunchy. Free of ketchup and pineapple, it has an adult sweetness, slightly circuitous, taking its time.
Note that you will not find the words “sweet-and-sour pork” on the menu. The dish appears under the alias “fried pork in orange sauce” ($9.95), although no oranges take part in its making and the color of the sauce is closer to dark butterscotch. Other linguistic mysteries include green bean sheet jelly ($9.50) — chile-flecked translucent, chewy bands of mung bean starch that snake and loop around strips of cucumber and pork, cold yet rippling with heat — and blotch soup ($6.50), a heady broth stocked with bright greens, minced pork and kinks of dough. The name of these inchoate dumplings, mian geda, roughly translates as “wheat-flour pimple” — thus, “blotch.”
Note, too, that rice will not be served unless requested, as it is not a major part of the Dongbei diet. Console yourself with blotches.
Lao Dong Bei, which opened in November on a low-rise commercial strip in Flushing, Queens, is narrow, bright and tidy, with just six tables and little décor beyond a flat-screen TV mounted in a back corner and a landscape print in the 
 vein. The chef, An Hong Li, is a native of Harbin, the frozen capital of Heilongjiang province, which borders Inner Mongolia and Russia’s far east. He and his wife, Zhu Wen Xia, live in a building behind the restaurant, and at times it feels as if the dining room is an extension of their home, as Ms. Zhu efficiently carves ribs, ladles soup into bowls and dashes out to buy plastic forks for chopstick-shy children.
Order the prosaically named chicken with mushrooms and vermicelli ($14.50), and they will think you know what you’re doing. Presented still hissing in a deep metal dish over Sterno, it is a battle cry against winter, a classic Dongbei stew in which chicken, after long canoodling with dried mushrooms, takes on their intensely earthy flavor.
You would require an army to exhaust the menu, to even begin to do justice to the hot-and-crunchy quail drumsticks ($14.50); fish sliced finely before being deep-fried and freckled with cumin seeds ($12.50); eggplant, green pepper and potato tumbled in soy, vinegar and garlic, rightly named triple delight vegetable ($7.50); and the so-called lamb chop ($21.50), in fact a rack of ribs, crackling with cumin, sesame and chile, the spices torched and fused into a fragrant crust that half warms, half burns.
For dessert, there are more vegetables: large, ungainly chunks of taro, sweet potato and apple, rolled in cornstarch and fried, with sugar added to the pan at the last minute so it barely caramelizes. Lift a piece and cobwebby strands of sugar follow. A bowl of cold water is provided for dunking, which hardens the sugar into an enamel that your teeth must, satisfyingly, shatter.
It is best to come to Lao Dong Bei with a friend who speaks Mandarin, or a crib sheet, or, at the least, humility and an open mind. Dongbei cuisine is still relatively new to our shores, and hasn’t yet entered into a dialogue with, or succumbed to, the American palate. We may have a small window of time before it joins the American-Chinese canon. Don’t wait.
