Ni Japanese Delicacies
Japanese
120 Essex Street,
646-675-4324
FIRST you must find it, somewhere in the depths of the Essex Street Market on the Lower East Side, past the cheesemonger, the Latin grocer and the baklava shop. Ni Japanese Delicacies, which opened last September, is not a restaurant, just a cluttered stall (a nook, really) without tables or chairs. At a short counter along the back wall, the owner and chef, Atsushi Numata, labors alone over a cutting board wedged against an induction burner. Pots and scissors dangle. Unlidded Tupperware and jars of condiments inch toward the edge.
What you’re after, which is somehow concocted in this approximation of a kitchen, awaits in the crowded glass case: small plastic bins of octopus cured in yuzu and pitched into chewy, sweet hominy ($8.99) perhaps, or chickpeas in a nest of black hijiki seaweed ($5.50), or brussels sprouts plumped up by sake and streaked with hot lemony yuzu kosho ($5.50).
Here too, depending on the day, may be crisp daikon and jicama, like a heap of shredded snow ($6.50), and a stinging slaw of red cabbage and carrots, slaked with apple cider vinegar and as lurid as maraschino cherries ($4.99). Those orbs that look like sunset-stained olives are umeboshi, made, unusually, with fresh plums instead of dried ($3.50). Each is a tiny gush, exquisitely sour.
The menu is mercurial and fragmentary, with soups and teas scrawled on separate chalkboards, a list of sandwiches set in a wooden picture frame (with an attached handwritten note that reads “Sold out sorry”) and stray laminated sheets itemizing ingredients in unpunctuated near-haiku.
Take your time. You do not want to miss the sushi rolls ($6.99 each), which despite the coarse, burly brown rice manage to be elegant and assertive at once. The rice balls ($2.50 each) — some riddled with jalapeño, others empurpled by plum — are craggy, unbeautiful and true.
Mr. Numata calls his shop a deli. That is bold in this neighborhood, in the shadow of the ancients, due south of Katz’s. But here pastrami on rye is swapped out for kabocha on brioche ($8.99), matzo ball soup for a broth of kelp and shio koji, fermented rice malt ($4.50).
But you will find smoked mackerel (from Russ & Daughters, as it happens) tucked into a sushi roll ($6.99). Now this is the Lower East Side: immigrants jostling, cadging and mooching from one another. For Mr. Numata, a native of Tokyo who has lived in New York for the last 22 years, local sourcing means wandering the neighborhood, sometimes simply reaching across the aisle. Hence the brioche, from Pain d’Avignon a few stalls down, and the hominy, from the adjacent Batista Mini Market.
It is improvisation, not fusion. Quinoa is soaked in coconut milk before bedding down in ruffles of kale ($6.50). Wasabi, avocado, nori and honey meld in a head trip of a sandwich ($9.99). You will barely notice that the bread is studiously made of sprouted grains and seeds.
Everything you eat here is good for you, occasionally too much so, as in the case of a chalky mass of purple yam, or a knob of sticky black rice, trussed in a banana leaf, which when unpeeled reveals gummy strata of mung beans, red beans and peanuts, tasting of the water they were boiled in. Never mind. Tomorrow there will be a fresh array of enticing bins in the case, stacked alongside the shrink-wrapped smelt and raw macaroons, the turmeric-based hangover cure and lemon-grass-infused water. Also on sale are vintage aprons and tenugui, traditional Japanese cloths hand-dyed with Pop Art designs. This is old world and new, at a pace somewhere in between.
While you wait for your order, meet the neighbors. Pick up some yucca, croissants, spanakopita or bourbon-infused Sozzled Pearl cheese. Get a haircut from the Uzbek barber. Consider that in a few years all this may be dust: plans are afoot to raze the market and relocate the vendors. Go now, while you can.
