Momofuku Ssam Bar
Korean
207 Second Avenue,
212-254-3500
IF you’ve had just about all of the fawning over 
 that you can take, think about how those of us dishing out the praise feel. We’d love to move on to a more original object of adoration and would be happy to pronounce him overrated or just plain over  —  we’re cranky and contrary  that way.
But he won’t let us. He keeps demanding more from himself and his restaurants, keeps giving us reasons not to stray. Exhibit A: Momofuku Ssam Bar, the cornerstone of the Chang legend.
It opened in the summer of 2006 and before its first birthday established itself as the go-to, drop-in mess hall for enlightened food lovers on all budgets at all hours, its menu a relatively unstructured collection of small and large dishes, its kitchen open well past midnight on weekend nights, its backless stools doled out on a first-come-first-served basis.
It justly enshrined Mr. Chang as a chef who went further than any of his peers in wedding serious, sometimes challenging food and an ultra-casual, spontaneous dining ethos in tune with unbound times. And it no more wanted for business than it did for acclaim.
Mr. Chang might have let Ssam Bar coast from there. He had other projects to tend to: the relocation and expansion of Momofuku Noodle Bar; the openings of Momofuku Ko and, just weeks ago, Momofuku Bakery and Milk Bar, an annex of Ssam with a major  sweet tooth.
But bit by bit and month by month, he tinkered.
When I gave Ssam two stars in The New York Times in February 2007, it had only a smattering of wines. Now it has about 200, smartly and creatively chosen.
Back in early 2007 its only dessert was a mochi 
 sampler. Now it has three choices, courtesy of the ascendant pastry whiz Christina Tosi, who deftly integrates salty and sweet by adding Gorgonzola to a pear sorbet and, in another dessert, sandwiching a saltine panna cotta between peanut butter pastry and a Concord grape sauce. If those aren’t enough, you can toddle down a short passageway to Milk Bar, get a cookie or a slice of pie, and eat it, standing, at one of the counters there.
The late-summer renovation that created Milk Bar also reconfigured Ssam, now graced with a better layout and about 70 stools, up from 55 before.
In addition, Ssam has expanded its daytime offerings, which until recently focused on Asian burritos. Now more than half of the dinner menu is available at lunch, and Ssam has abandoned the burritos, which were long its least successful items.
But these advances aren’t my only prompts to reappraise it.
In the last year and a half, I’ve found myself returning to Ssam again and again, and not just because new dishes regularly appear  — that happens elsewhere, too  — or because its steamed buns with pork belly remain the city’s most perfect finger food.
I’ve circled back because eating at Ssam feels so unencumbered, honest and joyful, and because I can’t stop reflecting on the daring and importance of Mr. Chang’s work there.
Yes, he and his team of skilled helpers demonstrate greater finesse and more culinary ambition at Ko, designed to be the polished, precious Momofuku. But you expect nothing less than excellence from a restaurant with just 12 coveted stools and a no-choice, multicourse tasting menu that lasts two hours and costs $100.
At freewheeling Ssam, you can drop in for just 30 minutes, have a snack of one or two small dishes, pay just $20 for them. And yet the quality of the food  — its fastidious sourcing, vibrant seasoning and ingenious  grace notes  — isn’t dumbed down in the least for an informal context.
Ssam’s best raw fish compositions  are on a painterly par with Esca’s. The whole pork butt  — meant to be eaten by six or more people  — is a pigout as fatty and fantastic as any great barbecue joint’s.
Such disparate options don’t usually appear on the same menu, but Mr. Chang trusts diners not to be disoriented by an assortment of dishes without any instantly clear theme or overriding ethnic allegiance  — by platters of artisanal American hams next to a tangle of Sichuan-style beef tendon alongside a hanger steak with a romesco sauce. He pulls off this eclecticism, which could easily lapse into incoherence, by keeping the menu sufficiently succinct and making sure everything on it counts.
No dish comes across as a compulsory sop to unadventurous eaters or an obligatory nod to some trend. It seems, instead, that Mr. Chang & Co. are simply feeding you what they themselves most enjoy eating.
Usually that means pork, which pops up in some form in more than a third of the dishes. Often that means offal, clearly one of his passions, reflected in the terrific panko-crusted, deep-fried pig’s head torchon on the current menu.
But sometimes it just means a crunchy baguette with a cow’s milk butter from Vermont and a goat’s milk butter from Britain. Ssam charges $8 for this, rightly wagering that if you really value bread and butter, you’d rather pay for something superior than get something ordinary for free.
Seemingly straightforward dishes harbor attention-getting surprises, like the Dijon spaetzle with slices of duck in a relatively new entree that’s outstanding, though not as outstanding as the crisp-edged pork blade steak dressed with buttermilk, pickled ramp juice and Kewpie mayonnaise.
Not all the surprises are created equal. A 
 chawan mushi studded with chunks of Grana Padano cheese deserves more points for seasonality and originality than for out-and-out appeal.
And Ssam has irritations. There’s no hot coffee or hot tea, and that seems less an interesting aesthetic choice than a stubborn mannerism in light of their unavailability, too, at Milk Bar, which is open for breakfast.
The wait for a stool can be long and the music very loud and a meal’s pace fleeter than you desire.
But those realities amount to a dining idiom that suits many circumstances better than a more conventionally coddling one  —  and that’s every bit as valid. With Ssam, Mr. Chang has made as confident and compelling a case for that as any New York chef.
***
207 Second Avenue (13th Street), East Village; (212) 254-3500,   
A sleek, rollicking room with about 70 backless stools, many at a long counter, and a partially open kitchen.
 Loud.
 Cured hamachi; steamed pork belly buns; bread and butter; country hams; squid salad; brussels sprouts; pig’s head torchon; poached cod with pine nuts; pork blade steak; duck with Dijon spaetzle; hanger steak; whole pork butt; PB&J dessert; pear sorbet with Gorgonzola dolce.
 About 200 choices spanning many regions and price points, supplemented by an extensive sake selection and interesting beers.
 Dinner salads, small dishes, sandwiches and ham platters, $8 to $21. Entrees, $18 to $29. Rib-eye or whole pork butt for groups, $140 to $200. Desserts, $5 to $10.
 Lunch from 11:30 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. daily; dinner from 5 p.m. to midnight Sunday through Wednesday and to 2 a.m. Thursday through Saturday.
 Taken only for groups scheduling a whole pork butt dinner.
 All major cards.
 Enter through Momofuku Bakery and  Milk Bar on East 13th Street. Restaurant entrance, dining room and accessible restrooms on street level.
 Ratings range from zero to four stars and reflect the reviewer’s reaction to food, ambience and service, with price taken into consideration. Menu listings and prices are subject to change.
