SpaHa Soul
American
2294 Second Avenue,
347-463-7387
Artist Thornton wore a red apron as he greeted guests at 
, but when asked if he was the chef, he paused. “I’m the ‘chef,’ ” he said with a laugh, fingers pinching the air.
He was being modest (a decade ago, he was an executive chef overseeing four restaurants in Mexico City) but also honest about his somewhat accidental career. He learned to cook from his Southern grandmother, who raised him in Long Beach, Calif. As a young man in Mexico City doing modeling gigs and struggling to make ends meet, he cooked for his equally broke friends. Gradually his circle expanded. One night, he made dinner for a friend of a friend who owned a restaurant. He was hired.
SpaHa Soul, which opened in Spanish Harlem in 2013, stays true to that origin story. “This is the most informal dining experience you’ll ever have,” Mr. Thornton announced on my first visit. The space is a squeeze, with four glass-top tables that seat at most 16. Plates may be china or plastic; silverware is rolled in paper napkins, secured by rubber bands. The menu exists on a single iPad that is passed around.
“Make yourself at home,” Mr. Thornton said. “But don’t take off your shoes. I don’t have that kind of insurance.”
The food, too, has an unstylized, improvised feel. Some dishes really are improvised: Mr. Thornton once made fried chicken with white gravy for a neighbor who said she had a hankering for the food of her Southern childhood. The dish is now on the regular menu, under her name (the Betty), and it’s Mr. Thornton’s best, the chicken breast left to wallow in buttermilk spiked with Scotch bonnets, then dredged and fried. It comes with a mini church-supper lineup of candied yams, mashed potatoes and collards, whose faint smokiness derives not from ham hocks but from sesame oil — Mr. Thornton’s concession to another regular, who is vegan.
The menu is brief and unconcerned with borders. There’s a fine bitter heat to a Mexican-inspired mole over pork-cashew dumplings, and to a sauce of roasted poblanos half-cloaking a pork chop. Apeksha’s coconut curry, named after a friend’s Indian mother, gains depth from fresh coconut milk, made in-house by grating and straining coconut meat. A recipe for gumbo draws from Mr. Thornton’s grandmother’s Louisiana roots, although it’s named after a Parisian friend whose paintings currently hang on the walls. The base is catfish broth, thickened with roux and happily infiltrated by more Scotch bonnets.
The kitchen has no oven, so cornbread manifests as nicely chewy pancakes. Better yet are the red velvet pancakes, which one night my table requested as a special off the brunch menu. (Mr. Thornton did say, as he disappeared into the kitchen, “Holler if you need anything,” and we needed them.)
In the early days, he had trouble finding a reliable staff. At one point he was the chef, waiter and delivery man; when a customer called in an order, he would check with the diners (“You good?”) and hustle out the door.
Now he has two young assistants, Chris Cruz, his sous-chef, and Amber Davis, who helps prepare ingredients and makes cake truffles laced with cumin and orange zest for dessert. (Ms. Davis runs her own baking company, Kakes by Bam.) Occasionally they emerge from the kitchen to drop off dishes and get to know the customers; Mr. Thornton, who sees himself as their mentor, wants to give them experience in every aspect of running a restaurant.
SpaHa Soul is not a destination for those seeking culinary bedazzlement. The food is imperfect, sometimes wonderful, sometimes overly disposed toward salty or sweet. A different kind of nourishment is on offer. Enter the restaurant, and you become part of Mr. Thornton’s small, bright sphere of influence, where dinner is just an excuse for camaraderie. As night unspools, strangers lean between tables, as if inspired by their host’s gregariousness, to introduce themselves and share glasses of wine. (There’s no liquor license, but a nearby wine shop delivers.)
On a recent evening, the first diners to finish their meal stopped at the door and waved to the room. “Good night,” they called, and as one we answered, “Good night.”
