Jeffrey's Grocery
American, Seafood
172 Waverly Place,
646-398-7630
In the fantasy of New York, every neighborhood has a Jeffrey’s Grocery, a corner market with pressed-tin ceilings that carries the kind of peanut butter you like.
Jeffrey’s also calls itself a “Luncheonette & Oyster Bar.” Which is to say, it’s a restaurant  — there are rillettes, braised meat dishes and a wine list 35 bottles deep. It’s as if Mr. Hooper joined Slow Food, took a charcuterie class and developed a taste for Willamette Valley pinot noir.
It’s appealing during the day, when you can sit at a counter and order a brisket sandwich ($15) dressed with raw beets, horseradish and melting Muenster.
It comes across as calculating at night, when the crowd waiting to be seated talks in outside voices. The farm eggs and sriracha for sale say “grocery,” but the Kanye West pulsing from the sound system screams “happy hour.”
The plateau de mer is worth shouting for. The medium size ($65), two tiers of the ocean’s bounty, easily feeds four:  king crab legs, a variety of oysters, shrimp and cocktail sauce, briny clams the size of a quarter, rock crab claws, half a lobster. It’s an assortment of shellfish as generous as it is gorgeous.
And it’s what Jeffrey’s does best. The kitchen is really a kitchenette, and the less you ask of it, the happier you’ll be.
Try the bright Caesar 
 ($10) and the hot-smoked trout with cauliflower purée ($14).
Skip the gummy clam chowder ($6)  and the bland chicken liver and foie gras pâté ($14). And avoid main courses like the tough braised lamb ($22), the pork gratin ($20) drowning in creamed potatoes, or the roasted monkfish with romesco sauce ($22). The last dish is awfully close to  the recipe on Page 96 of Thomas Keller’s “Ad Hoc at Home” cookbook (a copy seems to live on a shelf behind the counter),  although it doesn’t taste like much.
Gabriel and Gina Stulman, Jeffrey’s owners, are also the couple behind Joseph Leonard (across the street) and Fedora (close by). The context helps. Jeffrey’s is a role player, not a star.
