Home
New American
20 Cornelia Street,
212-243-9579
If it really cared to deliver on the promise of its name, the restaurant Home would put television remotes on every table, have whining children tug on your sleeve, and interrupt dinner with calls from telemarketers: just another soothing night in the nest.
Luckily, it doesn’t. By calling itself Home, it’s telegraphing a culinary rather than an atmospheric bent. It’s prophesying macaroni and cheese (small dish, $10; large, $18), crunchy on top, creamy in the middle, perfectly salty and as satisfying here as anywhere in the city.
It’s making a geographic statement as well. More than many other restaurants flying the farm-to-table flag, Home favors local suppliers, going so far as to devote most  of its affordably priced wine list to New York producers.
Home came to Cornelia Street, which is home to other small-chambered charmers like Po and Pearl Oyster Bar, 15 years ago. It has since gone through changes in ownership and in the kitchen. The current chef, Ross Gill, came aboard two years ago.
Thanks to an extensive renovation this year, the restaurant has freshly painted white wainscoting, a small new bar and a revivified air. Although it remains a sliver of space, it somehow squeezes in about 35 seats, with 35 out back, in a serene garden heated for year-round use.
Over recent months Mr. Gill’s kitchen turned out sublime clam chowder ($11), studded with corn toward the end of summer and flecked with bacon both then and now. It was the best starter, trailed closely by three tiny crab cakes ($12) sparked by a cayenne-sherry mayonnaise.
Best-entree honors were shared by a lemony roasted game hen ($19) and a crisp-skinned  grilled brook trout ($23). The hen came with a generous tangle of garlicky greens and the trout with a heap of lentils. Home doesn’t à la carte you into the poorhouse. It supplemented a fine grilled Newport steak ($23) with creamed spinach and a savory bread pudding.
Several salads were overdressed. A few dishes were oversalted. And, given the homey come-on of the place, I expected fruit pies ($7 a slice) to be better than the ones I got: too bland, too cold.
But if you’re similarly disappointed, pluck a chocolate chip cookie from the plate that sits in the front window, just as it does at home.
