Casa Lever
Italian
390 Park Avenue,
212-888-2700
HERE now is a new Italian restaurant of the Manhattan old school, built for socialites and those who finance them, staffed by handsome, rakish men with huge wristwatches. It’s the sort of place where in the movie, based on a novel as yet unwritten by Dana Vachon, you might cast Anne Hathaway as the lead and Diane Keaton as her mom. You’re welcome, too. For all this, Casa Lever is a deeply likable restaurant. It’s very New York.
The setting is International, on the ground floor of Lever House, on Park Avenue in that gulch of skyscrapers north of Grand Central Terminal. Lever House was designed by Gordon Bunshaft. It was among the first curtain-wall buildings in New York, a triumph of glass volume over concrete mass, pure balance over specious symmetry. It’s the sort of building that makes you stand up straight.
In 2003, Lever House restaurant opened in the space, all cold certainty that the Four Seasons was coming to an end, that there was room for a new power restaurant in Midtown. That turned out not to be the case. Lever House the restaurant closed in spring 2009. Gherardo Guarducci and Dimitri Pauli, the dapper pair behind the Sant Ambroeus mini-chain, took over the room and opened Casa Lever in October with  a Milanese-ish menu from Mario Danieli, their hard-working chef.
They’ve made the restaurant warmer. Lever House’s spaceship vibe has been highlighted with wood trim, chandeliers, little red tables up front, soft carpets beneath the feet. There is a trove of Warhol prints on the wall, silk-screened reminders of Studio 54. These belong to the building, which in turn belongs to the collector and real estate burgher Aby Rosen.
Wine racks between the honeycomb booths along the room’s western side refract light into a feeling of conviviality. The art to the east puts even  arrivistes directly at the center of a particular kind of Manhattan scene. There is a lot of cashmere and silk at Casa Lever, plenty of crazy wealth. (That’s Mr. Rosen over there now!) But it’s still fun in Spence-Chapin thrift-shop merino, in a Housing Works frock.
The service is appealing, comic-opera stuff. And the food, while basic, is often quite good. The spirit of Sant Ambroeus, a restaurant born in Milan in 1936 and mother to the society rooms in the Village, on the Upper East Side and Main Street in Southampton, has never been more serene.
Vitello tonnato, the classic summery antipasto of chilled sliced veal served alongside what amounts to a deep cloud of tuna-infused mayonnaise, with a few fried capers strewn about for salty crunch, is here offered as advertised, no more. That is right for the room and its aesthetic: silky tuna sauce and thin folds of veal, just as the grandmothers made, unchanged by time or fashion.
A carpaccio of beef with a small tangle of wild mushrooms and delicate Parmesan chips is likewise flavorful, likewise welcome, as are  thinly sliced artichokes with soft baby arugula swaddled in bracing lemon, with more of those cheese chips. Micro-greens, those biosphere wonders too easily overcome by dressing, here stand up to little croutons and welcome a soft-poached egg, if not crisped prosciutto in the role of bacon or pancetta.
Is an appetizer of seared scallops with white asparagus and black truffle a good use of $18? That’s a question to wrestle, and there’s no correct answer. It’s the culinary equivalent of wondering whether Ferragamo shoes are worth the scratch. If they are to you, they are. The scallops are certainly well cooked.
In another direction there are the now-requisite raw-bar offerings of crudi. Of these, there is a shockingly flavorful mackerel plate, with lemon confit, slightly pickled red onion and smoked salt, the combination of which so heightens the flavor of the fish as to amaze. A simple dish of yellowtail tuna, pomegranate seeds and lime might be better consumed on a boat somewhere, with the fish still half butchered on the stern, but even still: it’s not unfresh. And there is a delicious and deeply attractive plate of king crab, sea urchin, pickled jalapeño and avocado. As young Mr. Ripley and  Dickie Greenleaf discovered in San Remo, it can be tough to share.
Pastas are generally simple, with a few change-ups thrown into the mix, probably for market flair. These, along with a muddy stuffed chicken, are the missteps on the menu. Amatriciana, for instance, is another classic of Italian cuisine, a sauce traditionally made of guanciale, or jowl bacon, with pecorino and tomato. Here it’s rendered with tuna, and served with a fat sort of rigatoni from Gragnano. It’s interesting, not great. Paccheri served with a red snapper ragout, cherry 
 and baby artichokes is less interesting, and not good.
But ravioli with sausage and burrata, draped in a fennel purée, is wonderful: creamy with a slight bite. There is a fine saffron 
 most notable for the pile of pulled veal that sits atop it, rich and salty, thick with fat. And spaghetti with little Manila clams and fresh tomatoes is a classic of the form.
A sensible person might make a meal out of the above and avoid the high prices of Casa Lever’s meat and fish courses. These are meant to sate those who don’t look at menu prices. But there are splurges worth the price: veal Milanese, for instance, pounded wide and fried with a rare excellence. Also terrific lamb chops with polenta and dark, rustic mushrooms strewn alongside them.
The restaurant’s bone-in New York strip is roughly the size of a hardcover Italian-English dictionary.  It’s cooked crusty and rich, as if for an audition at Peter Luger. It’s excellent. So too is the  Dover sole, with a Dijon sauce, vacationing from France and perfect alongside a glass of fragrant Ciallabianco, from Ronchi di Cialla in Friuli.
Desserts are worthy of Sant Ambroeus: marvelous sorbetti and towering gianduja of hazelnut and chocolate; truffles of chocolate sorbet, with orange gelée; even  just a serving of cut fruit, designed for ladies who continue to lunch.
None of the food at Casa Lever is particularly groundbreaking. It owes little to the recent trend toward Italian cooking of the sort found at Marea or Del Posto, all towering ambition and crazy imagination. That’s all right. People used to say the thing about Italian cuisine was that it is mostly just excellent ingredients served plain on a plate, without much interpretation. Sometimes that’s worth recalling over just such a meal, in a beautiful room.
★★
390 Park Avenue (53rd Street), Midtown; (212) 888-2700, 
.
A do-the-frug spaceship gallery with many, many Warhols, lots of young money and good European manners. It’s comfortable for Mother, too.
 Loud in the bar up front, diminishing over carpet toward the rear.
 Vitello tonnato, king crab and sea urchin, mackerel crudo, ravioli, 
, steak, veal Milanese, sole, sorbetti, gianduja.
 There are some excellent and affordable wines from tiny producers, like the  Templare from Montenidoli, 2003, or a 2007 sauvignon blanc from Thurnhof. From who?  The sommelier, Vittorio Peluso, is an invaluable resource in this regard.
 Dinner appetizers and crudi, $12 to $20; 
, $18 to $28; main courses, $30 to $48.
Monday to Saturday,  11:30 a.m. to 11 p.m.
Recommended for lunch and dinner.
 All major cards.
 There is a ramp down into the bar. The main dining room is a few steps down from there.
 Ratings range from zero to four stars and reflect the reviewer’s reaction to food, ambience and service, with price taken into consideration. Menu listings and prices are subject to change.
