Goa Taco

79 Delancey Street,
347-276-5103
 serves, in theory, tacos.
They are identifiably half-moon in shape and sit snugly in one hand. But in lieu of a thin, pliant tortilla, the fillings — duck given the warming bloom of five-spice, or slow-roasted lamb, unbundling itself — are trapped inside paratha, a many-layered Indian flatbread built like a chapbook of dough, each leaf inscribed with ghee.
Some may call these sandwiches. Do semantics matter? According to Jeffrey M. Pilcher’s 2012 history, 
 the first application of the word taco was to a scrap of paper wrapped around gunpowder, used by silver miners in 18th-century Mexico to blast through rock: a cocoon of explosives. When the word migrated to food, it was already a metaphor.
So grant Goa Taco a little poetic license. Its tacos by any other name would be as delicious.
That duck, to start: It’s a clever alliance of China and France, first cured with five-spice, then left in the oven to crackle in its own fat. The paratha, imported from Malaysia by an Indian supplier, is embedded with sesame seeds before its turn on the griddle, a nod to shao bing (sesame pancakes). A fillip of sweet soy teases out the theme, along with a bouquet of cilantro, radish and cucumbers pickled in rice vinegar and hot mustard, tiny switchbacks of fire.
Pork belly, with its gradations of surrender, is set against crisp jags of chicharones. Lamb shoulder, massaged with Oaxacan-style achiote paste and roasted for five hours, rests in beautiful tatters beside a mellowing swath of Greek tzatziki. A coarse raw pesto of spinach, basil, cilantro and toasted almonds is churned with blocks of Indian paneer still prickling from the pan, so that the leaves and herbs wilt just a little. This suggests a reverse-engineered saag paneer, infiltrated by crunchy chickpeas dusted with garam masala and curry leaves, and tomatillos pickled with mustard seeds and ginger.
Other tacos fall short of their fancies. Chicken chorizo, made in-house and haunted by paprika, almost disappears under bulges of goat cheese. Tofu is oversoft, arriving already caved in, and its Vietnamese banh mi-like entourage — pickled carrots, daikon, jalapenõs — acts tough but doesn’t back it up.
Each paratha is folded neatly in two around its abundant contents, then flattened in a panini press so the center holds. The exception is the sole dessert, listed on the menu as churros, although they more closely evoke deep-fried mini éclairs: parathas rolled and tucked around dark chocolate, hazelnuts and mascarpone. A hot gush and they’re gone.
Goa Taco began two summers ago as a stand at Smorg Jr., a food market in Park Slope, Brooklyn, and opened on Delancey Street last December as a pop-up. It has now settled into “semi-permanent” status, as the 31-year-old chef and owner, Duvaldi Marneweck, puts it. (The restaurant occupies a shallow storefront under the aegis of 
, a Nantucket-style seafood shack next door; the two restaurants share a downstairs kitchen, which makes all the slow-roasting possible.)
There is hot sauce for sale in dark brown bottles, like a tincture from the Wild West, with enough Scotch bonnets to make your eyebrows flicker. A turquoise deer head, peaceably molded from resin, looks down on window seats and counters that have been jerry-built from shipping pallets and scaffolding planks. A no-smoking symbol is stamped directly on a patch of marble wall, left over from the building’s former life as the Bank of United States, its cornerstone laid in 1914.
The grab-bag setting fits Mr. Marneweck’s approach to the world’s cuisines as one large lending library. He grew up in Pretoria, South Africa, and has cooked in England and Australia, sifting through the culinary modes of British pub, French bistro, Italian trattoria, Mexican taqueria and haute farm-to-table.
And if the tacos aren’t really tacos and Mr. Marneweck has never been to Goa, what of it? He took the name from Australian slang (“I could really go a beer, mate”). But it also carries a whiff of longing for a distant, as yet unseen shore.
