The Leopard at Des Artistes
Italian
1 West 67th Street,
212-787-8767
HIGH summer in New York City and the Upper West Side is quiet at twilight, vast swaths of the neighborhood lost to the Hamptons, the Vineyard, the Cape, the Shore. But the Leopard, which strode fiercely into the moldering Café des Artistes space on West 67th Street a few months ago, was purring as only the big cats can.
Gianfranco Sorrentino and Paula Sorrentino, who also own Il Gattopardo in Midtown, have transformed what was a dark and queasily romantic space into an airy and cheerful southern Italian clubhouse. (Leopard is English for gattopardo.) Extensive cleaning has removed the nicotine lingerie that clad the bodies of the cavorting nymphs on the old Howard Chandler Christy murals that surround the room, revealing copious nubile flesh and shining white teeth. The carpets have been pulled out and replaced with stone floors. Sleek wood veneer has been applied to some of the walls.
And the menu, which for the last few years of Café des Artistes ran best to potato chips and cheese dip at the dark and charming bar in the restaurant’s rear, has become a testament to the rustic joys of Sardinia and Sicily: simple food, apparently simply prepared.
The restaurant has been an immediate hit with a particular subset of Manhattan society: the one that derives fame from power rather than the other way around. So there was the former New Jersey governor Jon Corzine last week at a table up front, tan and leonine, receiving nods and handshakes. Glenn Lowry, director of the Museum of Modern Art, sat dapper at a table behind him, eating with Adam Weinberg, director of the Whitney. This pairing appeared to pique the interest of Harold Holzer, a vice president of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, seated across the room.
People wave at one another constantly at the Leopard, as if at a gala or a board meeting. Lawyers nodded at television producers, who acknowledged fund managers at the bar, who fiddled with their pearls. A diner eating solo with a WQXR bag tucked into the banquette beside him deboned his own Dover sole. (“I enjoy the challenge,” he said.)
The only awkward spot is the bar, once one of Manhattan’s great dark-and-quiet cuckolding spots. It has tragically been brightened in its move from the south wall to the north, and is the one space in the restaurant that may be said to have been too modernized.
“I tell you now some specials,” said a waiter up front. As at Il Gattopardo, there are generally a few, and recently one has been a melting burrata cheese of exceptional creaminess served with juice-bursting 
. This is absolutely worth ordering if offered. Lashed with olive oil that offsets the acidity of the fruit while underscoring the sweetness of the cheese, it is a dish that tastes not simply of summer, but of pleasant and pleasing affluence, of a tomatoland that exists somewhere far from the one described in Barry Estabrook’s important new book on the horrors of industrial tomato farming in Immokalee, Fla.
“Worth ordering” is, of course, a relative phrase. The Leopard, for what it serves, is an expensive restaurant. (The waiter will not tell you now the price of that burrata, but it is $18. The Dover sole, buttery, rich and excellent, runs $45.)
Still, there are bargains to be had. Delicate little cakes of lentils and ricotta, served with a dill-flecked yogurt sauce, may be too dear at $12 (and maybe too dry), but there is a healthy count on the sweet roasted beets in a hearty $11 
 that pairs them with peppery watercress and salt-rich Gorgonzola. You could follow this with a starter plate of meltingly grilled octopus with sweet, soft potatoes dressed in olive oil and lemon ($15), and make a very pleasant meal.
Pastas are the best large-plate option for the cost- and flavor-conscious, with a marvelous dish of bucatini with sardines, fennel and raisins for $20, and a dead-simple chitarra with cherry tomato sauce and basil for $17.
Vito Gnazzo, the chef at the Leopard as at Il Gattopardo, has a sure hand with these and, especially, with the accompanying sauces: as with the burrata and tomato salad, they taste not so much cooked as composed, which is the great trick of Italian cooking, and what makes it so hard to master. It is technique disguised as nontechnique, complexity playing at simple and plain.
The bucatini in particular is especially pleasing, a complicated melody of sweet-salty-sour that managed (in one mind, anyway) to sneak best-ever honors away from a similar version cooked by Antonella Cajozzo at the Malibu posada on Gran Roque, Venezuela, a Sicilian outpost in the Caribbean sea. The 
 is slick beneath the crunch of some bread crumbs and against the lip-bite softness of raisins. The combination promises that summer will last forever.
As for the listed main courses, which offer but one dish under $30 and four above $40, the best options are the simplest: lightly breaded swordfish with lemon juice, olive oil, garlic, oregano and parsley; or a thick-crusted grilled rib-eye for two, aged to tenderness and minerality, that arrives as if in a bower of rosemary, alongside a thatch of excellent fries. Il Gattopardo’s phenomenal meatloaf — veal and beef cut through with prosciutto, pine nuts and peas, then bound together with eggs and fat — is also available.
Pair the meats with a too-pricey Nebbiolo in honor of Italy’s unification of north and south (the restaurant shares its name with a best-selling 1958 Italian novel about the era of Garibaldi), and life on the Upper West Side takes on a pleasant glow. It can only increase with the application of an espresso granita to beat the heat outside, or a bowl of fresh mixed berries with zabaglione. (Avoid at all costs the plain fruit plate, an homage to Midtown salad bars, circa 4:45 p.m. on a Sunday in July.)
Service in the restaurant, led by Mr. Sorrentino, is of a sort that will be familiar not simply to regulars at Il Gattopardo, but anyone who has spent time in similar haunts around Manhattan, from Elio’s on upper Second Avenue down to Il Cantinori on East 10th Street: white-jacket opera buffa, heavy on the upsells, totally enjoyable. Everyone bustles, even as the hour grows late.
Now give a wave to Jamie Niven, the Sotheby’s auctioneer, as he heads toward the door. Café des Gallerists!
★★
1 West 67th Street, Upper West Side; (212) 787-8767, 
.
Renovated luxury, with nudes.
Not unpleasant, though hardly hushed.
 Beets, grilled octopus, burrata, bucatini, chitarra, swordfish, Dover sole, meatloaf, steak, espresso granita, berries with zabaglione.
 A serviceable list of Italian varietals, organized geographically, that runs a little more toward expensive than it does reasonable.
 Appetizers, $9 to $15; pastas, $18 to $22; entrees, $24 to $46.
Monday to Friday, noon to 3 p.m.; Monday to Saturday, 5 to 11:30 p.m.; Saturday and Sunday, 11:30 a.m. to 3 p.m.; Sunday, 5 to 10 p.m.
Recommended at least one week ahead.
 All major cards.
The main dining room is at street level. A few steps up to the second and third dining room areas and bar. Restrooms are at the back of the third area, down three steps.
 Ratings range from zero to four stars and reflect the reviewer’s reaction to food, ambience and service, with price taken into consideration. Menu listings and prices are subject to change.
