Patina
African
823 East 169th Street,
718-378-7700
“You don’t eat, we fight,” said the woman who had brought out the heaping platter, hands on hips. Then she leaned forward and gently folded up the ends of my sweater sleeves, which were drooping dangerously close to the food. “So they don’t get dirty,” she said, before disappearing into the kitchen.
It can be an intimate, if slightly disorienting, experience dining at Patina, a very small West African restaurant that opened two and a half years ago in Morrisania, in the Bronx. The name — derived from that of the owner and chef, Tina Amalime, known as Lady T — is posted in the windows, which are sometimes still partly covered by steel shutters, even when the “Open” sign is lit. On the awning, the title is simply African Restaurant, alongside a promise of African, American and Caribbean cuisine.
What is served is Nigerian. Ms. Amalime grew up in Lagos and immigrated to the Bronx in 1988, at age 15. Ahajia Suley, originally from Togo, assists in the kitchen; Ayomie Dougan, a native of Sierra Leone, takes care of diners, and was the only employee I saw on my visits.
No menu is presented, at least not in written form. “What would you like?” Ms. Dougan asked affably, sitting down in the chair next to me.
“What do you have?” I countered.
A plate of sample bites arrived, enough to make a meal on its own: ewa oloyin, honey beans, a sweet variety of black-eyed peas; egusi, a meld of spinach and ground melon seeds that evoke pepitas; jollof, loose grains of parboiled rice suffused with tomatoes, peppers hot and sweet, curry powder and thyme, and strewn with hunks of goat, some still patched with skin; and dense, chewy waachye, jasmine rice and black-eyed peas cooked with millet leaves until they turn ruddy, under a nutmeg-tinged beef stew that expands the soul.
At other West African restaurants in town, I’ve been conscious primarily of texture and gradations of sourness; here the themes are earth and heat. Ms. Amalime attributes the latter to what she calls Jamaican peppers: Scotch bonnets. They are particularly effective in a volcanic gash of tomato sauce that brings a nice menace to a mound of asaro, yam porridge as voluptuous (and soporific) as mashed potatoes.
It is worth a trip here just for banga, a soup rich with palm-nut pulp and palm oil, the creaminess undercut by dried fish. Peanut soup is almost delicate by contrast, as if the nuts had been divested of sweetness and broken down into sheer fragrance. Okra soup is more of a challenge, beloved in Nigeria for its “draw,” a state of suspension that registers on the tongue as slippery and sticky at once. To a Western palate, the Scotch-bonnet burn is a helpful distraction.
The dining room is austere, the walls blank save for first-aid instructions duct-taped by the front door, the obligatory “choking victim” poster and a sign warning against drinking alcohol while pregnant. (No alcohol is available, only Malta, a nonalcoholic brew that tastes like liquefied, bitter granola.) A Lysol air freshener has been affixed on high, at what appears to be an accidental angle. A portable heater grudgingly generates a thin halo of warmth.
One night, the restaurant was filled with men dining solo at separate tables, watching “Jeopardy” on the flat-screen and occasionally calling out an answer; several customers stopped by for takeout. On another night, the only diners besides those at my table were a couple of women who lingered chattily by the kitchen window, then ate briskly, disappearing in under 15 minutes.
Ms. Dougan drifted out of the kitchen every now and then to arch an eyebrow at our still unfinished food. Finally, we meekly asked to have the rest packed to go. “You taking the bus?” she asked. “Keep warm.” When we looked back from across the street, she was standing in the doorway, waving.
