Vaucluse
French
100 East 63rd Street,
646-869-2300
A critic could run out of new ways to express disappointment in 
 if Altamarea didn’t keep coming up with new ways to disappoint.
Disappointment requires hope, and there are reasons to hope for great things from the latest Altamarea production, 
. The company, run by the chef 
 and the finance-and-operations wizard 
, has deep pockets and a loyal talent pool to match.
A server escorting one of my guests to the restroom told her, “Michael White is a great chef and a fantastic human being.” Maybe she was a plant, but Mr. White does have a gift for turning Italian food, especially pasta, into a hedonistic tumble between silk sheets. He also has a talent for finding and keeping skilled cooks like Jared Gadbaw, the executive chef at Marea and at Vaucluse since it opened on East 63rd Street in late summer.
This is Altamarea’s first French restaurant, another hopeful sign. For the last few years, the group’s new Italian places have been little more than remixes of its old Italian places. 
 was the Altamarea restaurant with extra steak; 
 was the one for the northern slopes of the Upper East Side. With Vaucluse, Mr. Gadbaw gets to dig around in a fresh patch of dirt.
Vaucluse does not try to give us a view of contemporary French cooking the way 
 or 
 do. Much of the menu lassos the grayest of old gray mares and drags them out for one last trot around the paddock. Some of the mares are revived by the exercise. Others, like the chocolate mousse that has been repeatedly violated by bits of baked cocoa meringue and buried under chocolate ice cream, seem as if they would rather be left alone to live out their retirements in peace.
Depending on how you order, Vaucluse can be superb, quietly competent or oddly off kilter. The chilled roasted leeks are a virtually perfect appetizer, gorgeously soft and stripped of all raw-onion harshness; as counterpoints, the sprinkle of almonds and the whole-grain mustard vinaigrette, not too pungent, are just right.
Chicken soup, which we usually save for nights when we need to crawl under the covers, is, at Vaucluse, a reason to get dressed up and go out. Tiny elegant gnocchi bob around in a deeply flavored, lip-smacking velouté; cream is piled on top just in case it’s not rich enough.
 make a glorious comeback in the form of beefy-red roasted veal tenderloin in a truffled veal jus. The veal sits next to an innocent-looking rectangle that turns out to be sliced black truffles between slices of bread crisped in butter. On top of this voluptuous little sandwich is a lobe of seared foie gras.
The pâté of pork and duck inside a soft pastry crust is impeccably traditional. As far as I know, there is no precedent in French tradition for Vaucluse’s épaulettes, double-barreled ravioli with rabbit confit and Swiss chard loaded into one barrel and reblochon in the other. They will set their own precedent, because they are preposterously good.
The technical work on all these dishes is impressive, but they come to life because a light bulb went off in somebody’s head. In other regions of the menu, the wattage dims.
The magnificently simple combination of red wine sauce and a poached egg known as oeuf en meurette has been complicated so much that it’s no fun anymore. The egg is trapped inside a ring of roasted delicata squash, and the sauce has been reduced to a sticky, sharp and slightly too-salty syrup.
The poulet rôti grand-mère is dull enough to make you wonder if Grandmother learned to roast chickens at a hotel school, although it comes with a profoundly appealing ballotine that’s something like a chicken-and-foie-gras meatball wrapped in skin.
The potato tart is a jumble of sliced fingerlings, lardons, bits of Camembert and truffles waiting for something to happen. Nothing is going to happen as long as they’re all loafing on a crackerlike crust that you could safely serve to a patient on a no-flavor diet.
If all you ask of a pork chop is for it to be round, pink and wet, the one at Vaucluse will meet your requirements.
Many dishes land somewhere between inspired and depleted. At the happier end of that spectrum is the duck à l’orange for two, which features a fine if somewhat over-reduced sauce and a phenomenal cap of evenly golden skin. Why two people need to order a sliced duck breast is a question I can’t answer. How the price was pegged at $92 is another; the huge gratin of turnips and broccoli that is part of the deal doesn’t quite get you to $46 a person.
The pogo-stick vicissitudes of Vaucluse intensify with the stabs at classic desserts made by Alina Martell in collaboration with Robert Truitt, who oversees pastries at all the Altamarea restaurants. I would have kept sinking my spoon into the dark-chocolate soufflé until it was gone if the other people at the table had let me. It was a pleasure to see the scalloped ring of a Paris-Brest, and it would have been even more of a pleasure to eat if the pastry had been crisper.
But look out. The caramelized mille-feuille was deeply uninteresting, the buckwheat crust of the mixed-fruit tart rested on a drift of crème fraîche custard as salty as feta, and one night a crème brûlée had been cooked so hard it curdled. It came with a little dish of berries with mint leaves under powdered sugar, the way Belgian waffles are served at an ambitious bed-and-breakfast.
Seeing the meal crumple at the last course was the most disappointing thing of all, because the desserts I ate at Costata and Ristorante Morini were precisely turned adventures.
It must be a challenge feeding the trim and carefully dressed people who fill the two handsome, proper dining rooms when so many of the recipes seem to contain the instruction “Fold the butter into the butter.” A dizzying slick of it clung to the egg noodles that came with the boeuf bourguignon and the coq au vin, each very well made and rich enough on its own.
Perhaps to make things up to us, we were asked if we would like the trout Grenobloise served with the brown butter — the whole point of the dish — on the side.
Vaucluse is comfortable and reassuring enough that it will almost certainly find an audience on the Upper East Side. It’s far from a bad restaurant. It’s just not, as my teachers used to say, using its full potential.
