The Castello Plan
New American
1213 Cortelyou Road,
718-856-8888
Jacques Cortelyou, the 17th-century creator of Manhattan’s first map, called the Castello Plan, was also a real estate developer. He would be pleased with the attractive dining scene that has evolved along the street bearing his name. One of Cortelyou Road’s most appealing additions is this wine bar named after his famous survey.
The menu guides you through a series of delicious small plates. Start with a bright seasonal 
: sweet, chive-strewn potatoes ($5); cucumbers in crème-fraîche dill dressing ($5); or shredded cabbage, tossed in sesame oil and pickled ginger ($7).
A meander through the very good Italian charcuterie includes fiery coppa, earthy wild boar cacciatorini and a fennel-enriched soppressata (1 for $6; 3 for $15; 5 for $24).
Except for the lusty rabbit and truffled yam open-faced sandwich ($12), most of the entrees are petite and carefully composed: a stack of duck confit with tart apples would be an improvement on Thanksgiving’s main course ($11); a “cake” of chilled crab meat is nearly overwhelmed by its sweet-salty tobiko topping ($9).
Even better are the crostini ($7 each), particularly the fat smoked sprats and boiled quail eggs on toasts slathered in turmeric mayonnaise. Greasy, bold and comforting, it is great food for the quirky, fun wine list on which a dangerously quaffable txakoli and an oaky, chilled blend of carignan and grenache share billing with an Austrian rosé that is steely and as green as wheat-grass juice.
Because desserts like chocolate bark or sweet potato pie (all $5) are hard to swallow on a 90-degree evening, linger instead over cheese (3 for $15; 5 for $24; 7 for $32) in the wood-paneled dining room or on the pergola-covered deck.
With only a few hints to the meaning of its name and no old-timey cocktails, the Castello Plan is less self-consciously a throwback than other Brooklyn boîtes. It is a relaxed fit for a neighborhood of Victorian mansions where there already is plenty of history. 
