Pok Pok Ny
Thai
117 Columbia Street,
718-923-9322
AT first I didn’t notice the green chile paste at the center of the plate. I was in the backyard of a new Thai restaurant in Brooklyn called Pok Pok Ny (rhymes with “rock rock fly”), enjoying a deep communion with a grilled sausage that seemed to be everything anyone could want on a summer night. The sausage was rough-hewed and reddish, with little studs of melting pork fat and traces of galangal and white pepper that were flowery and spicy at the same time.
Though this sausage, a favorite in the Thai city of Chiang Mai, needed nothing more than a cold beer, I began dunking it into that chile paste. And then I’d dunk the Frito-size curls of fried pork rinds, and wedges of steamed kabocha squash, and long beans tied into knots. The paste, called naam phrik nuum, was hot but not chokingly so, and had some of the grassy sweetness of a grilled green bell pepper, and one quality that green bell peppers don’t have: I couldn’t get enough of it.
As I kept dunking, my perspective underwent a Copernican shift. The sausage had seemed to be the center of the universe, but it turned out that it, and everything else on the plate, revolved around that mesmerizing naam phrik nuum.
Altered perceptions come free with the price of dinner at Pok Pok Ny, which was opened by the chef Andy Ricker. Mr. Ricker owns an acclaimed cluster of casual Thai eating and drinking places in Portland, Ore., and a takeout joint for papaya 
 and Vietnamese chicken wings on the Lower East Side, 
.
Now he has set up his first sit-down restaurant in the city. New York is already lucky to have 
 in Elmhurst, Queens, where the chef Duangjai Thammasat brings delicacy and beauty to fiery dishes, and 
 in Woodside, Queens, which Sripraphai Tipmanee, the owner, has made into a beacon for Thais and non-Thais alike. Ms. Thammasat is from Thailand’s central heartland; Ms. Tipmanee is from the south. Zabb Elee, in Jackson Heights, Queens, and in the East Village, offers the electrifying flavors of Isan, the country’s northeast.
I’ve heard some New Yorkers insist that they will stick to these established restaurants. If convenience is their priority, they have a point. Sripraphai is about 15 minutes from Pennsylvania Station, and Ayada is about 25; Pok Pok Ny is a 40-minute journey, including a hike from the subway to a stretch of Brooklyn waterfront amputated from Cobble Hill by the Brooklyn-Queens Expressway.
You’ll need to factor in more time if you fail to arrive shortly after Pok Pok Ny opens at 5:30 p.m. The restaurant doesn’t take reservations. Later arrivals are exiled to a bench or wooden chair beneath swirling ceiling fans in a backyard tent. There they sit until a table is free in the tent, in an open-air patio or indoors.
This cheerfully ramshackle village seems to have been banged together overnight by somebody who didn’t expect to be there six months from now (and who never ran the numbers on having three dining areas served by a coffin-size bathroom).
So yes, by all means go to Ayada and Sripraphai. Everybody should. But don’t tell yourself that you’ll be getting the same stuff, because it isn’t true.
The first way Pok Pok Ny shifts your perspective is by offering the food of northern Thailand, which has been largely missing from New York. With a wealth of ingredients and an abundance of pork and firewood, the region developed a cuisine that is less incendiary than other Thai cooking, contains almost no coconut milk and makes great use of the grill.
To that end, behind the backyard tent is a remarkable outdoor kitchen with a black-barrel smoker, a vertical charcoal rotisserie, a clay-lined pot and a standard grill or two. That kitchen brings the warm breath of charcoal smoke to the kai yaang, grilled hens that can start the meal with a burst of lemon grass; to little half-moons of soy-glazed pork neck that come with ice-cold raw mustard greens, for crunching between bites of pork; and to long eggplants roasted until they are as soft as pudding and nearly as sweet.
You even taste it in a salad of grilled and minced catfish dressed with mint leaves, dried chiles and lime juice. The salad, called laap, comes with stalks of herbs grown in Florida from imported seeds. There are the glossy and sour blades of bai makhok, the Thai olive; spade-shaped leaves of khao tong, with a flavor that earns it the English name fishwort; and deceptively pretty spears of bai sadao. Eaten on its own, sadao is so ferociously bitter that you think about calling a lawyer. Folded into a spoonful of laap, it is no more threatening than basil.
Here comes another shift: you could prowl the city for years without finding some of the ingredients in Mr. Ricker’s kitchen. I’d read about black crabs, pests that can fell a rice paddy unless they are scooped up and preserved in salt, but had never encountered one in a green papaya salad before Pok Pok Ny. Pitched into the salad, shells and all, the tiny crabs are hard enough to crack molars, but they are part of Mr. Ricker’s mission of reproducing northern Thai cooking in Oregon or Brooklyn with as much fidelity as he can muster.
He is nothing if not obsessed, liable to begin sentences with, “It’s a long story.” If his enthusiasm is contagious, though, not everyone on his Brooklyn staff has caught it. One night we asked our server whether the powerfully refreshing sweet-sour sodas called drinking vinegars were popular in Thailand. “I’m not really sure,” was the answer, and that was that.
There are other ways in which Pok Pok Ny hasn’t synchronized its watches yet. An order went missing for ages, then showed up in duplicate. And one night I ran into two or three dishes whose flavors seemed to be napping, including a fried egg salad and even a papaya salad. I left downcast, humming Peggy Lee: Is that all there is?
No, it’s not. In my next visits I was thrilled to taste more remarkable dishes than the table could hold: prawns in smoky noodles simmered with soy and ginger in a clay pot; an eggy pancake of juicy, sweet mussels with garlic chives; a stunningly complex pork laap. Compared with other pork laaps I’ve had, this one seemed to have eight or nine extra dimensions. The memory of it will be enough to keep me docile next time I wait for a table.
