Distilled
American
211 West Broadway ,
212-601-9514
“Hey,” the man on the phone said. “Are you still coming tonight?”
It took a moment for me to realize that he was calling from 
 to confirm my dinner reservation.
“Yes,” I replied. “Cool,” he said, and sounded as if he meant it.
Distilled opened in June on the corner of Franklin Street and West Broadway in TriBeCa, the former home of Drew Nieporent’s 
 and 
. The belly dancers and the frozen-margarita machine are gone, but a certain effervescence remains. So does Mr. Nieporent, hovering in the background as guru to Distilled’s owners, the first-time restaurateur Nick Iovacchini and Shane Lyons, the 25-year-old chef.
The space is blandly handsome, with dark woods and charcoal banquettes, breathlessly high ceilings and quasi-medieval wheel chandeliers like crowns of fire. One side is devoted to the bar, where the drinks, by Benjamin Wood, are lady-killers, elegant with a knife twist. Occasionally 1980s mope rock shimmers from the speakers.
Service is confoundingly friendly, almost coddling. When I stood outside reading the posted menu, someone came hurrying down the steps to hand me my own copy, so I wouldn’t “crane my neck,” he said. On arrival and departure, a host leapt to open the door.
The mission statement that preceded one meal (“We are a modern American public house,” the waiter intoned) was both unnecessary and slightly coy about Mr. Lyons’s ambitions. Yes, wings are on the menu, but they are jacked up with gochujang, Korean fermented soybean and chile paste — borrowed, perhaps, from the larder at Momofuku Noodle Bar, where Mr. Lyons worked for a year.
There are occasional technical flourishes, like watermelon cubes Cryovaced to intensify their flavor, and mushrooms surrounded by puffs of buttery onion soubise, aerated by an iSi siphon. A tousle of dehydrated and shaved bacon adorns an open-face sandwich of heirloom tomatoes and basil on sourdough: a B.L.T., of course. Sunflower sprouts make up for the missing crunch.
Other classics are updated rather than upended: popcorn dusted with garlic, cumin and brewer’s yeast, which evokes cheese; snappy pickles fermented with gochugaru, Korean red chile powder; pork ribs glazed with more gochujang, teasing the sweet-salty border without straying too far in either direction.
Onion rings, battered with Yuengling beer and tapioca flour, are fried, then frozen (a theatrical waiter boasted that they had been “brought to negative 60 degrees”) and fried again. They arrive nicely sturdy, the sole purpose of their existence to ferry the narcotic-like condiments, burned scallions cut with jalapeños and mayonnaise with the sting of preserved lime.
The substantial burger (which the menu modestly refrains from telling you is made with grass-fed, organic-grain-finished beef) is abetted by what may be the finest version of Tater Tots in town, the grated potatoes cooked until just underdone and then crisped with Wondra flour.
“Everything here goes to 11,” one diner marveled. Duck breaded and fried like chicken is brazen and irresistible, despite the oversweet accompanying waffle, a spongy slab of brioche dredged in custard, like French toast. Even broccoli turns wanton, flung with slivers of duck bacon and pickled watermelon rind in a fish sauce vinaigrette, with (wait for it) a dollop of duck fat.
But liver pâté served with plumes of baked, dehydrated chicken skin? Now this is confrontational. “My mission in life is to make skinny girls fat,” Mr. Lyons told my table. He got a laugh, but the cracklings were abandoned after one bite.
The only logical end to such a meal is s’mores — deconstructed, as is the fashion, with a hickory-smoked graham-flour cake, a torched smear of marshmallow fluff, dark chocolate pudding and graham crackers broken on top. It is obvious and no less pleasurable for it. (Kari Rak, previously at Bouchon Bakery, will introduce a new dessert menu this month.)
Or take a shot of moonshine, with an apricot shrub as a chaser. It edges everything in halos and can make you believe that a modern American public house, whatever that is, is where you want to be.
