Babu Ji
Indian
175 Avenue B,
212-951-1082
Babu Ji stands a half-mile from the East Village’s declining Curry Row, where Indian restaurants once huddled shoulder to shoulder, epauletted in twinkle lights and nearly indistinguishable.
The distance is calculated. At 
, which opened in June, the menu is succinct rather than sprawling, the dining room a sleek diagram of black floors, white walls and gray tables, with pops of color from Bollywood films flickering by the bar. A stuffed peacock guards a self-serve refrigerator stocked with craft beer. Two Indian men — one with a woolly mustache and sunglasses rakishly atilt, another in a hot-pink uniform, cradling a tuba — preside in photographs above. (Babu ji is an honorific for a man of authority, even if that authority extends no farther than the block he lives on.)
The food is dressed up, too: yogurt croquettes pinned with an orchid boutonniere against a shocking-pink sunset of beetroot ginger sauce; tea sandwiches of paneer pressed around crunchy pear and ginger; crisp bubbled wafers under an upheaval of chickpeas, pomegranate seeds, grapes and tomatoes, slashed by cumin yogurt, date-tamarind sauce and mint coriander chutney piqued by lime, a beautiful confusion of sweet and sour.
“May there be ghee and sugar in your mouth,” reads a proverb painted in Hindi script on the wall. It’s what you say in India to a bearer of glad tidings, and suggests a happy promise to diners. But ghee is notably absent.
“I don’t use it,” Jessi Singh, the chef, said firmly to my table one evening. He had stopped by to introduce the tasting menu, another novelty for East Village Indian restaurants, and spoke earnestly of a subtler approach to Indian cuisine.
Depending on the season, his curries may arrive arrayed in wine-red amaranth stems and branches of bright red currants like tiny tart balloons, or tresses of shredded red cabbage, translucent rings of daikon radish and pink-veined baby Swiss chard. There’s no set protocol for the garnishes; Mr. Singh improvises, and a dish ordered one evening could undergo a makeover the next.
His attentiveness to fresh ingredients may be traced back to his childhood in a village with erratic electricity on the outskirts of Chandigarh in northern India, and later in a series of Australian country towns, where he was home-schooled and worked the family farm. In his 20s, he set off to see the world, and in San Francisco met his future wife (and business partner), Jennifer, a nurse born in Canarsie, Brooklyn.
They ran a few Indian restaurants in Australia before moving to New York this year. (A previous iteration of Babu Ji, in Melbourne, is now under new ownership.) They’re still easing in: On one visit, the chutney was too sweet, a vexing problem since it was reprised in so many dishes. A Keralan moilee of coconut milk, turmeric, mustard seed and curry leaves was rich but listless despite the addition of lovely petals of raw sea scallop. At times I wished the flavors would stop beating around the bush.
Mr. Singh does some of his finest cooking with classics, like leg of lamb braised for six hours in a sealed pot, dum pukht style; goat on the bone in a curry whose layers keep descending; and a black-lentil dal of smoky, wondrous verging-on-bitterness.
Babu Ji might be more revelatory if there were not already a number of restaurants that have raised the level of Indian cuisine in New York City: 
 and 
. Even Curry Row has 
.
Still, it’s hard to resist the elegantly feral plates here. Or the theater of dessert: Kulfi, a cousin of ice cream, suffused with cardamom and pistachios, is presented still entombed in skinny, tapering tin molds that you must roll between your palms to warm up.
Occasionally the service reminded me that we weren’t so far from Curry Row. One night, a waiter announced that he wanted to make a mustache out of a diner’s hair. Later, a waitress panicked when she saw that my table hadn’t finished the gol gappa, fragile semolina shells filled with that steadfast threesome: date-tamarind sauce, chutney and yogurt. “They’ll be ruined,” she cried.
We swallowed them whole.
