Kefi
Greek
505 Columbus Avenue,
212-873-0200
A FRIEND and frequent dining companion often complains of palate fatigue, that deadening of all response when too many of a restaurant’s dishes have too little nuance and a surfeit of the same bold —  even bullying — notes.
During some meals at Kefi, a madly popular Greek restaurant on the Upper West Side, what I experienced was more like palate mononucleosis.
The culprit was runaway saltiness, a sensation that came at me in the form of feta, olives, capers, caper berries, sun-dried 
, anchovies, sausage and such, usually in some combination of two or three, occasionally in a combination of even more than that. An appetizer of warm feta, to be spread on pita, seemed to have most of those salty ambassadors. Start your meal with it and your palate may never get out of bed again.
All of these ingredients are legitimate players in Greek cooking, and the chef at Kefi, 
, is a seriously talented Greek cook. But at this restaurant, he too frequently goes overboard, in terms of what he throws at a dish and how much of it he tosses around. It’s messy, obvious cooking, wholly unlike his work at Anthos and mostly unlike his work at Mia Dona, where the food I had occasionally veered in this direction but usually pulled back in the nick of time.
Kefi is the most downscale, affordable of these restaurants, and that may well be part of the explanation. To keep prices low but satisfaction high, Mr. Psilakis is trying to tease big effects and full flavors out of dishes that don’t cost a fortune to make. Salty, cheesy players are helpful tools in this regard. They just shouldn’t be used with quite this much abandon.
I admire him. That may seem an odd non sequitur, but whatever Kefi’s weaknesses — and it has strengths, too, to be discussed shortly — it’s a restaurant that’s a levelheaded, vanity-purged  response to the current economy and to diners’ appetites for comforting, affordable food.
Both Mr. Psilakis and the restaurateur Donatella Arpaia, with whom he owns this place, are restaurant-scene darlings with enough heat on them right now that they might well have chosen to defy the economy and do something flashier. And they might well have made it a success in spite of the times.
But with Kefi they’ve fashioned a restaurant for the masses (or at least the upper-middle-class, Upper West Side version of masses) and for its neighborhood, whose diners were putting more of a premium on value than on high fashion or culinary pizazz long before the Dow went into its current swoon.
Kefi was such a monster hit at a first location, on West 79th Street between Broadway and Amsterdam, that  Mr. Psilakis and Ms. Arpaia decided to upsize significantly. In its new location on Columbus Avenue near 84th Street, the restaurant spreads out over two floors and has about 200 seats, more than double the former capacity.
On many nights at 8, every one of them is full, and something akin to an angry mob gathers at the host station, glaring at the hosts. I get the sense that Kefi hasn’t quite aced the reservation book, or maybe there’s little way around the fact that on the Upper West Side, seemingly no one will be cajoled or corralled into a 9 p.m. dining time. By 10 p.m. on weeknights, the restaurant’s a ghost town. The meatpacking district, this isn’t.
Once seated, diners are rewarded with cheerful service and food that’s filling and intermittently impressive for the price.
An appetizer quartet of spreads, including vibrant tzatziki and creamy taramosalata, is several notches above what you’d get in most similarly priced Greek, Turkish or Middle Eastern restaurants, and it feeds two. Yet it’s just $9.95.
Kefi’s meatballs, four hefty ones for $6.25, are made with a tender combination of beef and pork and come in a pool of tomato sauce with enticingly potent strains of garlic and olive. Another of the best appetizers, a warm potato salad, is a real textural triumph, the fat, soft fingerlings contrasting with thin, crisp green beans. And the measures of feta and olive in the salad don’t tip into salty excess.
But the octopus I had here wasn’t nearly as tender as a similar appetizer I had just nights later at Taverna Kyclades in Astoria. Kyclades’s fried calamari was better, too.
The Kefi dinner menu has a section between the appetizers and entrees for Greek or not-quite-Greek pasta dishes. While most are satisfying in a hyper-robust way, some have at least one and usually two ingredients too many. That was true even of my favorite, a dish of “tubular pasta” with sausage, peppers, onion, tomato and feta.
And why such recklessness with bread crumbs? All three pasta dishes my friends and I ordered one night had them.
The sheep’s milk ravioli I had another night was without bread crumbs, but in their place were fried shallots, and there were more fried shallots in a spinach salad that had plenty else going on: sun-dried tomato, hard-boiled egg, graviera cheese. Enough already.
No entree is above $16.95. All are generously portioned. And the braised lamb shank, on an irresistible bed of orzo that sops up the lamb’s juices, could pass muster at $10 more, in a more ambitious restaurant.
The short dessert list has clear winners: a dish of crunchy, honeyed pastry with orange spoon fruit; and an intense puck of chocolate mousse that, when eaten in bites that include some of the sesame sorbet alongside it, yields a treat much like, but more novel than, the combination of chocolate and peanut butter.
The all-Greek wine list is as price-sensitive as the food, and the atmosphere is pleasant, if Greek-restaurant predictable: a white-and-blue color scheme, decorative ceramics, that sort of thing. Try not to sit at a table by the bar, where the human traffic is most snarled.
And know that the scale and manner of the cooking Mr. Psilakis is doing here differ from what he’s done elsewhere around town — or what he did at the original Kefi. There, many of the same dishes were executed with more precision and restraint. It was a lesser stage, but it was a greater one.
*
505 Columbus Avenue (84th Street); (212) 873-0200.
A moderately glossy two-level Greek taverna in classic blue and white, with about 200 seats scrunched closely together.
 Loud.
 Mix of spreads; warm potato salad; meatballs; flat pasta with rabbit; tubular pasta with sausage; Kefi mac & cheese; lamb shank; galaktobouriko with orange spoon fruit; chocolate mousse with sesame sorbet.
 All Greek, comprehensive within that context and very affordable.
 Dinner appetizers, $6.25 to $9.95; Greek pastas, $9.95 to $13.95; entrees, $13.95 to $16.95; desserts, $4.95 to $7.95.
Lunch or brunch from noon to 3 p.m. Tuesday through Saturday and from 11 a.m. to 3 p.m. Sunday. Dinner from 5 to 10 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and to 11 p.m. Friday and Saturday.
For prime dinner times, call at least a week ahead.
 All major cards.
 Entrance at street level; lift from bar area to dining area with accessible restroom.
 Ratings range from zero to four stars and reflect the reviewer’s reaction to food, ambience and service, with price taken into consideration. Menu listings and prices are subject to change.
