Giuseppina
Italian, Pizza
691 Sixth Avenue,
718-499-5052
Giuseppina’s opened recently, a pizza shop in South Slope, Brooklyn, with a crowd that runs to neighborhood Brendas and Eddies, to their children, to people from around the way. It is a simple corner restaurant with a brick oven tended by men in white T-shirts. These characters make good pizza.
Chris Iacono, the chef and an owner, is brick-oven royalty. His brother, Mark Iacono, is the chef and an owner of Lucali, the celebrity-magnetic pizzeria in Carroll Gardens, a few miles north. Chris Iacono threw 
 for Mark Iacono at Lucali a few nights a week, and the brothers worked together on Giuseppina’s.
(Mark Iacono, for his part, was in a knife fight a couple of weeks ago. His adversary was a felon, the authorities said, with ties to the Genovese crime family. Both men were charged in the fight. Mr. Iacono is no longer in the hospital, but he is not yet back to work.)
The Giuseppina’s menu, as at Lucali, is limited: pies and calzones. There are toppings listed on a chalkboard, along with a scant menu of wines and beer. Everything cooked takes a while to arrive at your table, as if the creation of pizzas was more art than craft, which it is. Children grow fidgety.
But then a waiter brings a wide and bubbling pie ($20), smelling of fresh basil, of Parmesan and tomato sauce and the warm-milky scent of mozzarella (roughly half of it made from cow’s milk, roughly half from water buffalo’s). The crust is chewy, pliant, with a dull complexion that belies its great flavor. (It works particularly well as a sop for the oil leaking beautifully from rounds of crisp beef pepperoni topping, $3.) The combination is aces high.
Others will thrill to the calzone ($10 for small, $20 for large). Leaking ricotta, it evokes a Currier & Ives diorama of a New England snowdrift, and packs a substantial dairy tang. Paired with a shallow bowl of tomato sauce decorated with a sprig of wild oregano, it makes for a lively dinner on its own.
True pizza people, naturally, will order both.
