Flinders Lane
Australian
162 Avenue A,
212-228-6900
Here is the choice: a bottle of brown 
, with London’s Houses of Parliament in sky blue on the label and a secret recipe (tomatoes, tamarind, dates, molasses, malt vinegar, mysterious spices) dating from the late 19th century, or a ramekin of mayonnaise laced with a house-made sambal of bird’s-eye chiles, fish sauce and palm sugar.
One is a British icon, anointer of the bacon butty, staple of the working man’s cafe. The other is a foundational ingredient in Indonesian and Malaysian cuisine. That they cohabit the same table is testament to the genial ambiculturalism of 
, which opened in February in the East Village.
This is not catch-as-catch-can culinary fusion. The owners — Chris McPherson, who runs the front of the house, and Chris Rendell, the chef — grew up in Melbourne, Australia, and have done stints at New York restaurants with an antipodean or British colonial theme (
, 
). Mr. Rendell clearly has affection for English tradition, but his most interesting dishes draw on flavors from across the Indian Ocean and the South China Sea.
Rabbit loin is marinated in tandoori spiced-yogurt marinade and then grilled, for want of an actual tandoor. Nevertheless, it arrives with a nice char, offset by pickled green mango and a house-made naan in the Peshawari style, the dough folded around toasted coconut, raisins and cilantro.
Fermented black beans and raw lily-bulb petals, clean and crisp, lend a falling-rising tone to translucent panels of fluke. A ginger-heavy broth surrounding a steamed snapper fillet proves to be the best part of the dish, glorious simply spooned over rice. (Oddly, rice is not included; you must order it on the side.)
Chicken san choy bau is a classic of Chinese restaurants in Australia, if not China: ground chicken wok-fried with soy and, here, a jungle-curry-ish paste. Packed into curves of lettuce, it is somehow profoundly salty yet refreshing at once.
Mr. Rendell attempts laksa, too, the great Southeast Asian curry noodle soup that has become a favorite Australian late-night mop-up after having a few jars. His version is forged out of some 30 ingredients, including galangal, belacan (shrimp paste), coconut milk and candlenuts. The result is creamy and sweet, a flagrant appeal to the senses and quite likable, although it plays down the heat and the funk.
Elsewhere, the balance tips. Oysters are punctuated by shards of lap cheong (hot Chinese sausage), served with its own rendered fat; sriracha and sambal hyperbolize the accompanying Kilpatrick sauce of Worcestershire and tomato. I wasn’t sure there were oysters in there at all.
Most of the staff are Australian expats, save a lone American bartender. The décor pays homage to the gritty history of Flinders Lane, a former rag-trade district in Melbourne that is now home to SoHo-ish lofts and boutiques, with concrete walls and floors, bare bulbs suspended from skinny metal cages and a mural of adjacent Hosier Lane in its neon-graffiti glory.
There is a locavore slant to the menu, too, or what would count as locavore back in Melbourne: a celebration of “bush tucker,” indigenous foods like quandong, a fruit whose flavor oscillates between apricot and rhubarb, and Tasmanian mountain pepper berries, which Mr. Rendell tries to deploy like the chiles in Sichuan cuisine. (They’re meeker.)
This is most fully realized in the desserts, which include lemon myrtle sorbet, so intensely lemony it almost numbs, and ice creams made with wattleseed, evoking a hazelnut latte; Milo, the Australian Ovaltine; and broken, house-made Anzac (Australia and New Zealand Army Corps) oat biscuits, which the Australian 
 has mandated cannot be “used in association with the word ‘cookies,’ with its non-Australian overtones.”
Flinders Lane isn’t attempting the kind of haute modern Australian cuisine found at the acclaimed 
, in Melbourne, where the nightly tasting menu may include a wallaby-blood pikelet (pancake). The food here has moments of exoticism but sides with accessibility.
In fact, the dish I most adored here was the sausage roll, with peppery ground pork (a special blend courtesy of the British grocer 
, in the West Village) wrapped in an impeccably flaky, buttery, Platonic ideal of a puff pastry. It wasn’t deconstructed, elevated or fussed with. Just perfected.
162 Avenue A (East 10th Street), East Village; 212-228-6900; 
 Sausage roll; fluke; pan-roasted squid; tandoori rabbit; chicken san choy bau; grilled lamb rack; steamed snapper; sorbet and ice cream selection; croissant bread pudding.
 $10 to $29.
 Nightly for dinner, Saturday and Sunday for brunch.
 Accepted for dinner, but not for brunch.
 The entrance to the restaurant is one shallow step above the sidewalk, but there is a ramp. The restroom is downstairs but has a handrail.
