Crazy Crab 888
Asian, Malaysian, Seafood, Thai
40-42 College Point Boulevard ,
718-353-8188
“This is the best service I’ve ever had,” a woman at my table declared halfway through dinner at 
. We were eating off paper plates, our hands in plastic gloves and our faces bathed in fluorescence, in a former bodega still anchored by a counter selling lottery tickets and Alka-Seltzer.
But she was on to something. At this Burmese-Yunnanese-Malaysian-Thai restaurant aspiring to be a Cajun crab shack in Flushing, Queens, the ambience may be zero stars, but the service approaches four.
Partly depleted plates are soundlessly whisked away and their contents returned, within moments, neatly transferred to smaller containers (usually plastic-foam bowls) to make room for more dishes. Fresh napkins and gloves are replenished before you have time to register the necessity. Plastic bibs are delicately tied around diners’ necks, in a manner that suggests a spa rather than a nursery.
The food is less focused. Dishes labeled 
 or 
, still rare sightings in New York, excite; boiled seafood, available by the pound, does not. Order carefully and your meal could be spectacular.
The owner, Gina Liu, who was born in Burma (now Myanmar),  used to run Excellent Thai a few blocks north. There, the cooks — Sophia Wang (Ms. Liu’s sister-in-law), Mei Lee and Mg Naing — would occasionally make off-menu dishes from their native Myanmar, for those who knew to ask for them. They are now reunited in the kitchen at Crazy Crab 888. (About that numeric suffix: Ms. Liu grew up in Taiwan, and in Chinese culture, 
.)
Their specialties include laphet thoke, a salad of fermented tea leaves, looking like mulch and dank, tart and smoky at once. In Myanmar, it is often served as separate ingredients, to be mixed and calibrated by the diner. But here all is tossed and pressed together, so that a single mouthful is a concatenation of dried shrimp, crispy garlic, roasted peanuts, crunchy cabbage, fried beans (12 varieties) and rings of hot chile pepper, ending in a shiver of lime juice and fish sauce.
, or ginger salad, draws on many of the same ingredients and appears almost identical, with ginger standing in for the tea leaves. But it is an ambush, hot and bright, with double the crunch and a heightened sense of salt versus sweet.
Pork jowl is boiled, chilled and sliced into broad ribbons as thin as tissue. These come curled in a salad from the Chinese province Yunnan, Myanmar’s neighbor, and are faintly chewy at first, and then obligingly dissolve. More texturally unexpected is “yellow” tofu, made fresh every day, not from soybeans but from yellow split peas. It is a cousin to mung-bean jelly, albeit less slippery, with a consistency that calls to mind flan.
Ascribed on the menu to Yunnan, yellow tofu also belongs to the culinary traditions of Myanmar’s northeastern Shan State, with which Yunnan shares a border. Little batons of pork turn tangy from close quarters with house-made Shan-style pickled daikon leaves. Rice noodle soup arrives still frothy, laden with minced pork and pickled tofu, a variation on the Shan dish meeshay, by way of the teahouses in Mandalay; a virulent sauce of chile pepper, soy and lemon shocks it to life.
These were the dishes that made me want to come back. But when I visited, the tables around me were covered with boiled seafood (the restaurant’s specialty and the reason for the gloves and bibs) in plastic bags tucked into metal bowls, accompanied by half-cobs of corn. The seasonings — Cajun, lemon pepper and garlic butter — yearn, hopelessly, for the bayou.
Crazy Crab 888 sits on a churning boulevard near the Flushing waterfront, sandwiched between the Long Island Rail Road tracks and a liquor store. The décor is eccentric and possibly accidental: a clock orbited by forks and spoons, a lamp posing as a kind of voluptuous, dripping sea creature. Across the street is a 
, whose shoppers and tenants may be partly to blame for the restaurant’s identity crisis of a menu, a crowd-pleasing attempt gone awry.
Ms. Liu says her next restaurant will be purely Burmese. Why not this one?
