The Redhead
American, Southern
349 East 13th Street,
212-533-6212
IN the beginning, which was less than two years ago, Meg Grace cooked dinner on Thursday nights. That was all that she and her partners in the Redhead — which they had opened as a bar, with the goal of turning it into a restaurant — could manage or afford. It was a way of honing their skills and building a following in their East Village neighborhood while they upgraded the kitchen and refurbished  the modest space.
For more than six months Ms. Grace was a kitchen staff of one, more or less. As she put together her once-a-week  prix-fixe menus, which presented season-conscious comfort food that bore the stamp of her years in New Orleans, she did the ordering, the prep work — all of that. On Thursdays she’d get a helper    to plate the food and clean up, though Ms. Grace did as much of the dishwashing herself.
She painted, too, joining her partners, Rob Larcom and Gregg Nelson, in 3 a.m. renovations, after the last tipsy customers left. This was done with as much improvisation as everything else.
The ceiling that they installed was Styrofoam, cheaper than tin or tiles. Many pieces of furniture were hand-me-downs: chairs from the Tribeca Grill, banquettes from Montrachet. Mr. Larcom was still working for Drew Nieporent, a principal owner of those restaurants, and Ms. Grace and Mr. Nelson had worked for Danny Meyer. Much of the Redhead’s dishware was bequeathed from one of 
 restaurants, Eleven Madison Park.
The boards for the pizzalike flatbreads were made by students in a shop class at the New Hampshire high school where Mr. Larcom’s father was the principal. Dad himself helped make the tables. The owners’ relatives chipped in with flooring, with plumbing, with whatever needed doing. Slowly the Redhead came together, until it looked every bit a grown-up restaurant and was serving dinner six nights a week. It has been doing that for about a year now, to a packed house.
The Redhead remains a largely humble endeavor, with many limitations and its share of flaws, including a wine list sparser than it need be and service that’s often chaotic. But it is nonetheless the most inspiring  kind of restaurant story, happy proof of that hoary adage about wills and ways.
It wasn’t a readymade brand from another city, it wasn’t the latest outpost in a burgeoning empire, it didn’t have big-name investors and big-statement décor. It had bacon peanut brittle, buttermilk fried chicken, house-made soft pretzels and three scrappy proprietors unafraid to beg, borrow and toil round the clock to realize their ambition of a neighborhood place with  an idiosyncratic flair.
It isn’t exactly like any other downtown restaurant I know — its semi-polished, Southern-inflected pub grub is all its own — but it sharply reflects a few of the most prominent and rewarding developments in Manhattan dining over the years during which I’ve had the privilege of serving as The Times’s restaurant critic.
Now more than ever, diners  find principled, distinctive cooking in places   where they wouldn’t have expected it before: dessert trucks, baseball stadiums, postage-stamp storefronts, wine bars, taverns and cocktail lounges. In fact the Redhead was mostly a tavern and cocktail lounge during that span of Thursday-only dinners, which exemplified the possibility of terrific eating with untraditional trappings and captured the sense of gastronomic serendipity that defines this culinary moment.
With its first-come-first-served seating policy  and its televisions showing sporting events behind the bar, the Redhead speaks to the moment’s casual ethos. And it underscores the extent to which the East Village has become a center of gravity for young chefs intent on bold flavors. They clearly feed off of one another, a loose network of validation and motivation.
It’s here that Marco Canora, Gabrielle Hamilton and David Chang rose to prominence. It’s here that Anthony Mangieri catalyzed the artisanal-
 movement and that Sara Jenkins found her groove.
And it’s here that Ms. Grace, 36, has taken a leap forward in her career, which is clearly one to watch, because of her  ego-restrained way of preparing familiar, even lowbrow fare with such exacting standards and such sagely chosen grace notes that it takes on an unfamiliar luster.
She does potato chips with onion dip, both components made at the Redhead for a result that’s revelatory. Instead of croutons her terrific “one-eyed Caesar salad” has a piece of toast with an egg in it, its eventual fracture providing ooze along with crunch.
The fried chicken is never greasy, almost always tender and unfailingly accessorized by something perfect: biscuits or cornbread or, my favorite, an onion-goat cheese bread 
 that’s like a dreamy amalgam of stuffing and quiche. A roasted pork chop is juicy, and gets its  own glorious accessory in the form of a wild-rice-and-foie-gras boudin.
The concise menu changes frequently, in deference to the Greenmarket, and at any given moment has several salads and a soup — recently, sweet corn.
Among the entrees, which are generously composed plates, there’s careful balance: red meat, fish, a pasta. The pasta isn’t usually memorable. And the meat dishes are usually superior to the fish, except for the shrimp and grits.
Shrimp, grits and andouille sausage — there’s some meat in there, too. The combination speeds you toward the Gulf and the bayous and, with its shouts of butter and murmurs of brandy,  is nearly as good as any similar dish you’d find in Louisiana. Ms. Grace also makes the desserts, which are of a piece with everything else. A while back they included haute HoHos, a creamy, chocolate-y regression to childhood. A current standout is the caramel banana pudding — with her version of Nilla Wafers.
The presence of   strips of candied bacon with a chocolate and peanut butter sundae came across as a gross caricature of the East Village’s porky preoccupations; besides which, the strips were hard as rock and impossible to integrate into anything else.
Is Ms. Grace trying too hard for a follow-up to that irresistible brittle? Now that she’s doing a full menu to a full (and frenzied) house, are there a few more missteps?
Yes. But the most expensive dessert is $6, the median entree is under $20 and that brittle, well, it goes a long, long way. It was there almost from the start, and my bet is that it will be there until the end, which won’t be anytime soon.
★
349 East 13th Street (First Avenue), East Village; (212) 533-6212. 
A raucous front bar area yields, in the back, to crushed red velvet banquettes and a small measure of peace.
 Bearably loud.
 Bacon peanut brittle; chips & dip; pretzel with beer cheese; mushroom flatbread; one-eyed Caesar; sweet corn soup; shrimp and grits; fried chicken; pork chops; caramel banana pudding.
 Limited but accessibly priced; focus is on well-made retro and contemporary cocktails.
 Snacks and appetizers, $5 to $14; entrees, $10 to $22; desserts, $5 to $6.
Dinner 5:30 to 11 p.m. and limited menu to 1 a.m. Monday to Saturday.
Accepted only from 6:30 p.m. or earlier and only for groups of five or more.
  All major cards.
  Ramp to entrance;  accessible restroom.
 Ratings range from zero to four stars and reflect the reviewer’s reaction to food, ambience and service, with price taken into consideration. Menu listings and prices are subject to change.
