Campo de' Fiori
Italian
187 Fifth Avenue ,
347-763-0933
Campo de’ Fiori may seem like a pizzeria.
Half the menu is devoted to Roman square-cut pizzas. And the dough has a dramatic back story: it is a result of 15 years of experiments by an engineer specializing in the molecular properties of flour. Made in Italy, it is flash frozen, flown to Brooklyn and baked in an electric oven on a ceramic hearth. Slices hit the sweet spot between spring and crackle. They’re sturdy enough to eat with one hand, even on a Vespa.
But you can have a beguiling meal here and never taste a pie.
First there are green peas smoky with prosciutto, sweet baby onions and roasted peppers, tucked inside little Mason jars. A dish of egg “tripe,” with an omelet posing as offal in a vigorous marinara. Crunchy bruschetta, bronzed with olive oil.
All this constitutes the antipasto Romano ($12). The parade continues with a dual flight of salumi e formaggi ($25). Ask that it include gran bu di bufala, a crumbly hard cheese made from water buffalo’s milk that somehow evokes both earth and candy.
The chef, Andrea Dal Monte, who runs the restaurant with his wife, Yari, came to the industry late, after years in the Italian cinema. His cooking is plain-spoken, sincere. The least fussy dishes are the best: a nicely textured farro salad ($7), tomato, basil and almost indecently creamy burrata ($8).
You wish he made more pastas. Just a few are available each day. If you’re lucky, there will be gnocchi with musky oxtail ragù ($16), pappardelle fragrant with beef stewed in red wine ($16), and the double debauch of roast duck over oozy orzotto ($18).
After that, if you must, there is pizza. The matriciana, speckled with bacon, has a blunt appeal ($16).
Forgive the stark lighting, the tiled floor, the takeout counter. The vibe is uncozy, at odds with the quietly deferential waiters. It certainly doesn’t seem like the kind of place you can linger with friends, grabbing one another’s dishes across the table, getting pleasantly tipsy on a $45 bottle of wine. But you can. Come with people who enjoy one another’s company enough to be patient when the food takes a while.
You won’t forget you’re in Park Slope, but that is all right.
The other evening, a princess and a Spider-Man dined solemnly at the next table. They were exceedingly well behaved, primed for their Fellini cameo, before their mother packed them off to an early bedtime.
