Wasan
Japanese, Sushi
108 East Fourth Street,
212-777-1978
“Cold cheese 
” — was a dish ever described quite so brusquely, with so little attempt at seduction? Yet what appeared at the table was exquisite: a quivery white tile half submerged in dashi, topped with a filigree of tomato jelly and three exactingly cut slivers of asparagus ($5).
It was my first dish at Wasan, a Japanese restaurant that opened in the East Village in October, and the first hint of audacity. It tasted like fresh tofu, delicate and sweet, but the texture was voluptuous, like that of burrata. Spooned up with the tomato jelly, it reminded me, startlingly, of a caprese 
.
Next came foie gras presented like sushi, on rice bedded inside petals of endive, misted with a strawberry-flecked balsamic vinaigrette ($12). Then shrimp tempura, prickly with shards of tortilla chips, meant to be dipped in a cilantro raita ($9) — a tiny paean to Wasan’s East Village neighbors, the corner bodegas and the Christmas lights of Curry Row.
The chefs, Kakusaburo Sakurai and Ryota Kitagawa, are natives of Japan and veterans of Inagiku, the venerable (and very expensive) Japanese restaurant at the Waldorf-Astoria that  closed in 2009. Here their cooking continues to uphold the rigorous techniques of washoku, classical Japanese cuisine, but it’s more inventive, and infused with a sly affection for the chefs’ adopted city.
The crowd in the simple and unadorned dining room, on the nights I ate there, was almost exclusively ex-pat Japanese.  Everybody ordered the hamachi jaws ($15), whole yellowtail collar looking like something out of the natural history museum. Everybody was happy.
Sashimi and sushi are executed ably enough, but the excitement is in the small plates. You will want many of them. Consider the remarkably reasonable omakase menus, which change nightly ($35 to $45).
But on no account should you miss the Uni Lover ($12.25). It takes what could be the sexiest food on earth and doubles it, with a touch of sacrilege: sea urchin draped over sea-urchin chips, if you please. There is avocado tucked in there, too, of which I was initially dubious (that Californian interloper!), but it lends a necessary heft. And although I tend to like my uni straight up, I did not regret the crush of peanuts in garlic oil dabbed on top, a flickering heat.
Perhaps purity is overrated.
