The East Pole
American, English
133 East 65th Street,
212-249-2222
It was midweek on the Upper East Side, and the maître d’ wore a calla lily speared through a tiny braid behind his head and garlands of amulets, including one draped across his brow.
Beyond him, the room was wall-to-wall blazers and wire-rimmed glasses, men with soufflés of gray-white hair and women whose beauty seemed to violate the rules of time, reminiscing about Art Basel or lamenting a burst pipe in the house on the Vineyard.
The East Pole opened in September as an uptown sequel to the vaguely British fashion-crowd canteen 
, on the Lower East Side. While the downtown original occupies a former sausage factory, the East Pole unfurls over the garden and parlor floors of a prewar townhouse. (Ben Towill and Phil Winser, the Fat Radish’s owners, have teamed up here with Anthony and Tom Martignetti, of Brinkley’s.)
Inside, ceilings are low, light bulbs naked, specials handwritten on mirrors. Dark navy booths in tight, shiny leather, tufted with white buttons like studs of pearl, flank the room. A few coats hang on hooks by the front door, pub-style, but this is what you might call casual-aspirational: Most diners check theirs (and tip properly afterward, or should).
A few of the Fat Radish’s greatest hits are reprised. (The chef, Nicholas Wilber, ran the kitchen downtown and continues to oversee it from afar.) So here are thick slabs of potato that have wallowed in duck fat before being deep-fried, resulting in an almost glassine crust; a substantial burger with laurels of bacon; and the Scotch egg, soft-boiled, mantled in crumbled sausage (permeated with sage, allspice and onions, and closer to meatball than sausage), rolled in bread crumbs and fried. The egg comes from a pastured chicken, although the menu modestly refrains from telling you so, and arrives cloven in two, revealing its strata and core of dark orange, creamy yolk.
But these are distractions. The best dishes, as at the Fat Radish, revolve around vegetables, like purple, golden and white cauliflower sprawled over black lentils, the last underscored by a faint red curry that is a delicate cousin to vindaloo (more tingle than inferno); knobby roasted parsnips whose sweetness is offset by wheat berries mellowed in orange-scented 
; a fluffy beet-and-walnut hummus with whole radishes and crunchy tufts of Romanesco broccoli as crudités. Butternut squash is cooked down with apples and onions almost to the point of soup, then tossed with rock shrimp and cavatelli for a pasta that tastes confoundingly rich and light at once.
On each of my visits, the servers delivered long, lyrical paragraphs on the merits of the oysters. They deserved it, those lovely hand-harvested Moon Shoals from Barnstable, Mass., each a shot of brine ebbing to a bright, lucid finish.
Then the entrees arrived and the lights grew dim. One evening, scallops were tough; a heritage Red Wattle pork chop was verging on gray. Twice I ordered the fish pie, with its gorgeous, cloudy head of pastry that seemed to rise before the eyes, but neither time did I detect lobster, tarragon or fennel, as promised on the menu. (An Englishman at my table took a bite, looked pained and gently pushed the plate away. “No more of that,” he said.)
In such company, chicken Kiev was exciting, the flesh almost preening with salt under its crispy lid of skin. But there was no buttery gush from inside, not even an ooze, only a hollow containing the smallest dab of minced broccoli florets and garlic butter. (This, too, I ordered twice, ever hopeful.)
Desserts seem perfunctory: blocks of chocolate bread pudding, a $10 slice of apple pie that goes up to $15 should you wish it à la mode. A so-called adult sundae is adult only in the sense that all the fun is gone, scoops arrayed stolidly in a row. True, the chocolate ice cream is spiked with Scotch and the cherries soaked with Pimm’s, but these come off as mostly medicinal. Hardly an incentive to grow up.
But look around: The place is packed. Half a beautiful farm-to-table meal is still cause to rejoice on the Upper East Side. So keep to the top half of the menu, eat your vegetables, sit back and let the waiter call you “love.”
