Royal Seafood Restaurant
Chinese
103-105 Mott Street,
212-219-2338
EVERYBODY was having lobster.
Before placing an order, Chinatown veterans look around the dining room to see what others are eating. At the Royal Seafood Restaurant on Mott Street one recent night, the vote was unanimous. Grandmothers were having lobster and small girls in crisp dresses were having lobster and eight police officers in stiff blue uniforms were having lobster. Nearly all the enormous round tables draped with carnation-pink cloths were occupied, and sitting on the center of each was a platter of red shells split open to expose the shiny white meat inside.
Lobster wasn’t anywhere on the menu, but my table followed suit and asked for one anyway. It was hacked into sections and wok-fried with a sticky, time-honored Cantonese sauce of scallions and slivers of ginger. With chopsticks and fingertips, we dug the slippery flesh out of the legs, the tail and the claws, asking ourselves how lobster could be this soft and generously sweet.
We had followed the wisdom of the crowd and won. 
 would have been proud. So would the budget hawks back at the office, because the whole lobster cost $15.
This was a week after the hurricane and a few days after the lights had come back on in downtown Manhattan. Chinatown was on my mind. I worried about the mournful fish in their dark tanks, but I also worried about the money the restaurants had lost and might keep losing if tourists stayed away. Chinatown has lived through so much that it can seem indestructible, but restaurants are fragile.
We eat in Chinatown restaurants because no part of Manhattan so readily offers better food for less money; because the portions are truly meant for sharing; because even those places that don’t change their fluorescent bulbs as often as they might still buy fresh snow pea shoots each day. Royal Seafood has glinting chandeliers, not fluorescent bulbs, but it suits all the other criteria beautifully. It has the added benefit of serving food that is often very close to Cantonese cuisine, the original flavor of Chinatown, with enough modern Hong Kong flourishes to let you know that it’s 2012.
The kitchen is under the command of Kendy Cheng, who arrived in New York from Hong Kong several years ago and founded Royal Seafood as the chef and a co-owner. His crispy fried chicken is old-school, and one night gave me almost everything you could ask from that dish, with deeply flavorful meat pressed flat beneath a crackling sheet of skin. The bird’s head stared up from the platter.
I don’t know why some of the chicken’s original savor was missing on another night. But I know I am glad I overruled the person at my table who tried to vote down the Peking-style pork chops. He got jumpy when the server called the sauce “sweet and sour.” Of course, it was the furthest thing imaginable from the phosphorescent orange jelly of dubious takeout counters. It had the color of dark rum, the resonant tang of aged vinegar and the bittersweetness of burned sugar. The sauce brought a tingle of energy to the pork’s crunchy fried coating.
Smoking-hot oil is often the elixir of happiness at Royal Seafood. It cooks a whole flounder impeccably and makes the fins, tails and bones brittle and hard to resist. It turns salt-and-pepper seafood into fritters with a slightly sweet, saffron-colored batter that reminded me, pleasantly, of the Coney Island Boardwalk. The same batter makes a nifty little snack of cubed pork ribs; you chew and suck them before spitting out the bony bits.
And the deep fryer’s transformation of tofu into an object of desire is so impressive I might almost have considered it fraud, if I hadn’t been busy helping myself to more. Fried crispy bean curd was lovely; even more appealing were cubes of tofu dressed with a rich minced-pork sauce, and olives that were vaguely sweet and more fruity than briny.
There were unengaging exceptions to the rule of deep-fried excellence, like the T-bone steak and the “house walnut shrimp.” If fried shrimp and melon cubes glazed with warm mayonnaise sounds appealing to you, though, by all means take mine. Just leave me the candied walnuts.
Royal Seafood, rarely empty, draws rush-hour crowds for its dim sum. A manager stands in the front, looking around for empty chairs beneath one of the room’s four golden dragons with colored light bulbs for eyes. The moment somebody gets up to leave, the manager barks a number into a cordless microphone hooked up to a loudspeaker, and new customers rush across the room to claim their seats. It’s like a high-speed game show in which the prizes are dumplings.
The best strategy: sit on an aisle unless you speak some Cantonese. Tables are jammed together, and sitting too far from the trolleys puts you at risk of missing a favorite dumpling. I wouldn’t have wanted to skip the shumai, filled with rosy pink chopped pork or with shrimp and chives. And it would have been a shame not to try the hollow, pistachio-green spheres of sticky rice filled with salty peanuts and sweet black sesame paste. If I had sat in a back row, the chewy, lightly spicy cubes of starchy turnip cake tossed with dried shrimp, Chinese sausage and scallions may have passed me by.
Few of the dim sum items were exceptional, but all were good enough and all were priced to move, and move the meal does.
You can order from the menu all day, but the best time to explore it is by night, when the dining room and presumably the kitchen are less frantic. Dinner brings the opportunity to share a soul-warming casserole of curried oxtail or a platter of irregular, springy e-fu noodles with fat mushrooms. And it’s the right moment to try the house special baby lamb chops in a black-pepper sauce that has a caramel bitterness and an unexpected depth, an umami undercurrent that must come from leaves of seaweed that are frilly and green like an iguana’s beard.
In the evening, with enough people around the table, you can start the meal with a hot and deeply restorative soup. Maybe the bean curd with bits of chopped shrimp, or the West Lake beef soup with bright green cilantro leaves. A server will rush the steaming white tureen to the table, his arms straining at the weight. He will ladle it out. There will be just enough to fill every bowl. You will wish all your dinners began this well.
It’s Chinatown. Don’t forget it, Jake.
