Biang!
Chinese
41-10 Main Street,
718-888-7713
IF you are one of those people who believes that ingredients should always be treated with respect, by all means stay away from Biang!, an excitable name for a frequently exciting new restaurant in Flushing, Queens.
Before they arrive in the dining room, the biang biang noodles, a specialty of the house and its namesake, are punished in ways that might have unnerved the Spanish Inquisition. They are repeatedly swung up and down through the air, slapped on a table, ripped right down the center and then dropped in boiling water. After handling like that, the final application of searing chile oil must come as a relief.
When you eat those noodles, you might suffer, too, but only for a minute. Even if you have little fear of spices, the chile oil can bead your forehead with perspiration and make you blink back tears. Then you emerge on the other side, wide awake and energized, and you understand that the abuse in the kitchen helped make those noodles that much more fun to eat.
All that swinging and slapping stretches them until they are so long that when you lift one from the bowl to your mouth, it seems to go on forever, like a magician’s handkerchief. Even better, ripping the noodles gives them ragged edges that hang on to any nearby sauce.
You will want to hang on to those sauces, too. The one called “spicy and tingly beef with wide hand-ripped noodles” brings the hypnotic pairing of chiles and Sichuan peppercorn to bits of deeply concentrated braised beef. “Spicy and sour diced pork meat,” meanwhile, is a sauce that revels in oppositions: the sharp edge of black vinegar versus the supple fattiness of pork, the soothing spice-cake flavor of star anise against the fury of roasted dried chiles.
Then there is the biang biang dish that almost everyone gets, lamb noodles seasoned with longhorn peppers and with cumin so intensely fragrant that it seems to penetrate every taste bud you have.
Like everything at Biang!, the lamb noodles are a specialty of Xian, the ancient city in central China.
The recipes come from David Shi, a native of Xian, who recreated them from his memories of cooking with his grandfather before moving to the United States in 1998.
Biang! is essentially a cleaner, brighter, more modern sit-down version of Mr. Shi’s food stall inside the 
, an extremely ramshackle food court on Main Street in Flushing. He named the stall Xi’an Famous Foods. This may have been wishful thinking at first, when as far as most New Yorkers were concerned, Xian was famous only as the home base of the emperor who ordered up an army of terra-cotta soldiers and horses to keep him company after his death, in 210 B.C.
But famous is what the food of Xi’an became, and quickly, because Mr. Shi’s cooking was so vibrant and his recipes so novel to customers who did not grow up in China. His menu was drawn from all over Xian. Lamb soup came from the Muslim Quarter. The biang biang noodles are served in innumerable casual shops.
Another noodle, called liang pi, is a street food as common in Xian as the hot dog in Manhattan, said Mr. Shi’s son, Jason Wang. Cool, smooth, chewy ribbons of steamed wheat starch, liang pi are tossed with wrinkled tablets of house-made seitan and a head-clearing dose of stoplight-red chile oil.
As Xi’an Famous Foods accrued a following, Mr. Wang, then a business student in college, began to 
. He set up a 
 and led an expansion into Manhattan, where there are now three branches. Biang! is their latest move forward, a place where people Mr. Wang’s age might be happy to hang out and eat dishes that their grandparents would remember.
The menu at Xi’an Famous Foods is the template of 
 at Biang!, with some additions. There is now a whole page of skewers, like grilled cumin lamb and 
 skin (surprisingly flavorful in a nutty sauce of fermented tofu and sesame paste). The standout skewer, though, holds one meaty grilled chicken wing with salty, peppery, crunchy skin and sweet, smoky flesh. The other skewers cost $3 for three; the wings are $2 each.
Laudably, the prices as Biang! follow the heroically low ones at Xi’an Famous Foods, a nice surprise considering how much more attractive the space is. Mr. Wang designed it, liberally taking cues from downtown Manhattan places like the Momofuku restaurants. Light comes from hanging Edison bulbs, and you sit on polished wood benches at polished wood tables. There are tunes by Beyoncé and Kanye West, and enigmatic propaganda-style prints of pandas by the Singapore artist 
.
The transition from stall to restaurant has not been seamless. The servers’ notions of what it means to clear a table may not coincide with your own, and the kitchen can appear to struggle with the pace. One night, spaghetti-like strands of cold buckwheat noodles with cilantro and scallions were doused with mercilessly pungent mustard oil that stampeded its way into nasal passages I didn’t know I had. On another visit, I could barely taste the mustard oil.
My suggested strategy is to order an extra dish or two, just in case. Get the cold tofu in chile oil with pickled vegetables and get the crisp, zippily dressed lotus root salad. Get the improbably elegant canapés of rough-hewn pork sausage topped with fried quail eggs, and by all means get the juicy lamb dumplings in hot-and-sour broth. And even though they are served on a bun without much flavor of its own, get either the cumin lamb sandwiches or, even better, the chopped pork belly sandwiches.
In my case, the order-too-much strategy ended when dessert began. A cold egg drop soup made with fermented rice was vaguely beery and very peculiar, like a home brewer’s first batch.
The one sweet I truly enjoyed was steamed sticky rice with sesame seeds and jujubes, which are not the jaw-fatigue-inducing candy, but fruits that look like olives and taste a little like dates. (Watch the pits, though.)
There are many ways to adapt the cuisine of immigrants to a new country. But the father-and-son team at Biang! have hit on a model worth imitating: keep the recipes and the prices the same, and buy nicer furniture.
