La Chine
Chinese
540 Lexington Avenue,
212-872-4913
In a nest of dried grass and feathery moss sat an eggshell, its top neatly lopped off. Caviar and a crinkle of gold leaf shone just inside the rim. Underneath were layers of custard and hairy crab, a seasonal freshwater treat from China whose taste is a lot more seductive than its name. The rich, smooth pleasure in each spoonful almost made my head pop.
The egg was one of the first things I ate at 
, which opened in November inside the Waldorf Astoria, specializing in Chinese food made with finesse and an eye for beauty. This could get interesting, I thought. In fact, the rest of the meal and the two that followed did get interesting, in ways that those of us who love the cuisines of China wish would happen more often in New York.
Downtown Manhattan, Flushing in Queens and Sunset Park in Brooklyn are rich in Chinese restaurants. Their cooking can range from filling to thrilling, but it rarely aspires to climb the slopes of creativity. Ingredients are generally good but not stellar, limited as they are by the prices these restaurants can charge. Unlike many cities in Asia, New York has not historically had a broad base of people willing to spend a lot on Chinese food.
La Chine costs much more than most of them; lamb loin stir-fried with cumin is $38, about twice as much as the fervently admired Muslim lamb chop at Fu Run in Flushing. If you allow the man they call the “sake ninja” to talk you into a bottle, you could easily drop $100 or more. (This ninja wears a jacket and tie; he must be working undercover.) But at the risk of undermining my populist credentials, I’d suggest New York could use more Chinese restaurants that are as expensive as our most ambitious French and Italian places. Those restaurants could use more ingredients worth splurging on, and restaurateurs determined to lure talented chefs from China.
We have Hakkasan, of course, part of a global chain whose crackerjack cooks excel at dim sum but tend to play it safe with other courses. At the two RedFarms, Joe Ng cooks with originality and verve, but the recurring sweetness in the dishes betrays a tailoring of his ideas for perceived American tastes. The cooking at La Chine is something different.
The menu was devised by the 
. A native of Singapore, he became a protégé of the acclaimed chef Jereme Leung before setting up restaurants in hotels around Asia. With Mr. Leung, he worked out his ideas for La Chine, which he executes in the kitchen with
, the hotel’s culinary director.
The restaurant replaces Oscar’s American Brasserie, a glorified coffee shop whose loss did not leave a deep wound in the city’s psyche. The bones of the space have been exposed, the massive pillars and ceiling coffers showing off the hotel’s Art Deco monumentality, though not its Art Deco flourishes. Some tables are set in secluded alcoves at the east end, framed by spidery latticework that evokes carved Chinese screens. A central chandelier, like a huge upside-down wedding cake, shines on vases of orchids whose pinks howl in this room of muted creams and golds.
The effect would be more stunning if the lighting weren’t so murky; it hovers in the eternal twilight of surgery recovery rooms where patients slip in and out of consciousness. Each time I was about to go under, though, something from the kitchen would bring me back.
Raw seafood always did it. Sliced yellowtail was fanned out in a pinwheel over Sichuan chile oil. Translucent bands of fluke were darkened by black rice vinegar, China’s answer to balsamic, then touched with hot peony oil, which sizzled and whitened the lean fish as it landed. A long rectangle of bigeye tuna tartare seasoned with soy vinegar was strewn with flowers, herbs, pickled shallots and a stripe of caviar. All three dishes took a modern, Japanese approach to Chinese flavors. All three were very good.
So was the stack of lightly battered Spanish mackerel delivered under a smoke-filled cloche, like the sturgeon at Eleven Madison Park; the smokiness of the fish was underscored by a smoked soy sauce, appealingly sweet and sticky.
Broad-bean-fried prawns were juicy and tender-firm inside a crisp, golden coating that flaked into spicy crumbs I couldn’t help eating off the plate.
Cauliflower was stir-fried with thick bacon slices in a very hot wok that caramelized the bumpy surface to a delicious mottled brown. The snow pea shoots with garlic were as simple, classic and good as any I’ve tasted.
Everything is served family style except the soups, which ought to be. In individual bowls, they are hard to work into a shared meal, and people may be tempted to skip them. This would be a loss, because they are beautifully made; there’s a clarity to the chicken cloud consommé, vividly seasoned with ginger, and a shellfish-drenched power to the “eight hour golden broth,” thick with lobster, crab and scallops.
Before opening, restaurants now routinely put out photographs of one striking dish, like a band releasing a single to build excitement for an album. For La Chine, this was the barbecued duck. And it is an exciting bird, suffused with five-spice powder and ready to be tucked into griddle-blackened crepes with skinny sticks of cucumber, leek and, surprise, cantaloupe.
But if anybody had asked, I would have suggested leading with the black-iron tabletop grill that holds a wonderful barbecued collar of Berkshire pork, the meat’s pink edges crackling with a candied honey glaze. (The menu reveals that the honey was secreted by 
 who live on the roof, if that appeals to you.) Chicken with cashews may not make a great advertisement for a high-end restaurant, but it’s a great dish, in a kung-pao-style sauce that is keenly balanced between sweet and sour.
In fact, most of the main courses show off La Chine’s sophistication apart from some subdued seafood dishes. Sous-vide cod with black bean sauce was flabby and, like the scallops in a long canoe-shaped dish with peppers and onions, not a showpiece of sparkling freshness.
The restaurant’s French name is puzzling until the desserts show up; they are very much in a Western mode. The warm chocolate cake, with sesame ganache melting away inside, has a seductive undertow of spice. The most elaborate and prettiest is the vacherin of passion-fruit cream sandwiched by white spirals of meringue; there’s a white chocolate sphere painted with a metallic swirl like a pink pearl, and a marvelous scoop of sorbet made with fresh lychees. La Chine is far from the realm of fortune cookies, and better off for it.
