Rucola
Italian
190 Dean Street,
718-576-3209
Daylight pours through the elaborate window ironwork onto natural woods and restrained bric-a-brac. Famous young actors eat breakfast over scripts. At night, neighbors stop at tables and chat about the children. Everyone fills up on farm-to-table Northern Italian.
Rucola reflects Boerum Hill’s platonic ideal of itself; it’s full of rootsy Brooklyn good taste.
And good tastes. After an uneven start last year, the food is accomplished and satisfying. There are rustic, rich starters like veal spiedini: lemony, addictive cigars of tender meat rolled around anchovies, then breaded and pan-fried ($9). Green lentil soup is earthy and substantial, laced with Parmesan ($8).
The kitchen makes fine use of nuts. Colorful heirloom carrots are enriched with hazelnuts ($11); sweet, soft branzino crudo gains crunch and interest from toasted sunflower seeds ($12).
Freshly made pasta minds its manners; rigatoni gets just the right amount of Bolognese, fragrant with rosemary and nutmeg ($15). Entrees are more luxurious. The meaty fluke’s bouillabaisse-like broth turns creamy with a well-placed dollop of aioli ($22). Bone-in chicken is plump and moist in an unctuous jus with a nob of polenta ($18).
During the day, sandwiches excel. Fried eggs and wonderfully gamey mortadella are blanketed in fontina, toasted and melty on a nifty Caputo’s sesame roll ($8). For lunch, terrific roast pork and speck, balanced by sharp provolone and pickled green 
 on ciabatta, is a Tyrolean answer to the Cubano ($12).
There are missteps. Salads can be overdressed. White beans were tender one night ($6), mealy another. A communal table crowds the room. Service from the bar, with its whiskey-and-amaro cocktails, is slow.
Still, finish with a dark chocolate pudding ($7) — dressed in sea salt and olive oil, it’s a cliché, but a scrumptious one — and you might agree that Rucola does what a neighborhood restaurant should: make local life feel good enough that you want to live nearby.
