DBGB Kitchen and Bar
American, French, Hamburgers
299 Bowery ,
212-933-5300
HEY, ho, let’s go! 
, one of our more gregarious and intelligent restaurateurs, a four-star chef for his Daniel on East 65th Street, owner of three other restaurants in Manhattan, two more in Vancouver, and one each in Las Vegas, Palm Beach and Beijing, has opened a sausage joint near the corner of the Bowery and Houston Street. It’s a mosh pit’s distance from the birthplace of American punk rock.
He’s called it DBGB, a play on CBGB, the club at 315 Bowery that first brought the neighborhood underage kids with shaved heads  — and later its cachet.
Once, this kind of nerve might have gotten his plate-glass windows smashed. (We ain’t got time for that now.) These days it brings middle-aged Bouluddites in town cars and sportswear to eat and drink beer, to talk gaily of the market, the Galliano show in Paris, the Astor verdict, Letterman.
A cynic would call this fashion and scoff. But one bite of the crispy lamb ribs that were served in the bar area when the place first opened  — sweetly glazed, grassy meat, with a dab of creamy mint-flecked yogurt sauce  — ended all snark: Mr. Boulud has opened a very good restaurant. The lamb was sublime, earthy and spicy and rich, evidence of superb technique, the sort of snack that separates his empire from others in the celebrity firmament.
Recent visits to all five of Mr. Boulud’s New York restaurants suggest: his kitchens put out perfectly cooked food. Diners may quibble here and there (with the sweetened cucumber juice in the Hendrick’s gin cocktail at Daniel, for instance), but rare is the complaint about technique. Jim Leiken, DBGB’s executive chef, a young veteran of Daniel and DB Bistro Moderne, is no exception. His food game, as they say in rap precincts, is tight.
DBGB is not precisely a beautiful restaurant, though it bears masculine charms atop its cool concrete floors. There is that wide and open bar area, where the unreserved may sit and eat a slimmed-down version of the main room’s menu: a rich and beefy DBGB hot dog, for instance, and a beer. There are glass panels and mirrors everywhere, many printed with quotations of people whose culinary wisdom Mr. Boulud admires (Hemingway, Homer Simpson). Date-night couples and Wall Street irregulars abound.
Beyond the bar, surrounded by industrial racks meant to evoke the Bowery’s other past as a restaurant supply district, is the dining room: tables and cocoa-brown booths running down a long rectangle in the manner of a train car parked in a station. And there are in fact restaurant supplies on display: bottles of wine, towers of glassware, boxes of spices and, along the partly open kitchen, stacks and stacks of gleaming white china.
Above them is a burnished halo of worn copper kitchen pots and pans collected from chefs around the world and displayed as one might the gloves of great infielders. There is a chef’s table hidden behind the pastry station, where private parties are meant to observe the kitchen’s choreography as if they were dining backstage at New York City Ballet.
They’re working as hard as dancers, in this kitchen. There are 18 appetizers on the menu and 13 sausages that play double duty as appetizers and mains. There are four entries listed under “têtes aux pieds” (excellent sticky bits from the head down to the feet: veal tongue, crispy tripe, bone marrow, pig’s trotter). A dozen more entrees and half as many side dishes, each done up as for a fancy-dress ball, round out the savory portion of the evening’s choices. An investigation of the entirety reveals it’s all pretty good.
You might start with some of the items your men with the BlackBerrys order: an iceberg salad with heady blue cheese dressing, bacon and walnuts; or tuna tartare dressed in harissa-sesame sauce. Perhaps you’d like Mr. Leiken’s take on matzo-ball soup, an eccentricity on the menu that is nonetheless deeply satisfying. These are elegant enough for those interested in finishing with a modestly sized burger. Many are, their tastes already shaped by Mr. Boulud’s original 2001 foray into the burger wars, the extravagant sirloin burger at DB Bistro Moderne, stuffed then and now with braised short ribs, foie gras and truffles.
Here the burger comes plain if you like, or topped with pork. The best option is the coarsely named Frenchie, which arrives as if a passenger on an old Cunard ship, with confitted pork belly, arugula, tomato-onion compote and a slab of Morbier, riding a peppered brioche bun with cornichons and mustard on the side.
More food-obsessed mouths, however, will desire sausages. The boudin Basque, for instance, a disc of spicy blood and pig’s-head sausage served on top of a small pool of scallion-mashed potatoes, is a wonder, the sort of dish to convert those who quail at the thought of eating offal. The Vermont, meanwhile, a smoked pork link studded with Cheddar and served with hash browns and a red-onion crème fraîche, instantly legitimizes almost any combination of cheese and cased meat. It demands a subsequent order of the Viennoise, another pork link, this time cut with Emmenthaler and served aside housemade sauerkraut.
The Toulouse? It’s stuffed with ground duck gizzards and garlic as well as the pork, on top of soft, perfect cassoulet beans. The chorizo Espagnole comes with a pipérade and basil oil; the Thai with green papaya, some basil fried rice, a tiny fried quail egg and a faint squirt of sriracha sauce. You may order two at a time as an entree, which can lead to unfortunate pairings. An excellent pan-roasted Italian sausage with slow-cooked fennel and tomato, for instance, went lame in the presence of fiery mint-cut Moroccan merguez.
Really, you don’t need more than these. The entrees list  — “To Carry On,” in the menu’s parlance  — offers serious, Bouludish dishes that are almost too grown-up for the setting.
DBGB’s excellent sweet-flavored pan-roasted Arctic char, for instance, would not be out of place on the menu at the recently renovated Café Boulud. Likewise a duo of lamb that sees a bit of roasted leg paired with elegantly braised shoulder and a musky garlic confit. A side dish of Vichy carrots, elegantly turned, would do well at the flagship shop. (Going the other way, it’d be nice to see the smoked cumin-spiced sausage on lentil stew that’s served at Bar Boulud available at, frankly, every Boulud restaurant on the planet.)
Desserts take the diner to the silly, and to the sublime. Myriam Eberhardt, the pastry chef, supplies 
 sundaes and smart takes on old favorites, as in her 
 ice-cream sandwich, made with lemon ice cream (the pear’s in there, too, but as a sorbet) sandwiched between slices of rich, buttery shortbread and caramel sauce. If you’ve come to play hard, though, the best response is baked Alaska: vanilla, raspberry and verbena ice cream and a fresh meringue, set afire with Chartreuse. It tastes of France and America twinned.
Back in 2002, with just (just!) three restaurants to his name, Mr. Boulud published a cookbook, written with Peter Kaminsky, “Cooking in New York City.” On the cover, Mr. Boulud stands in the middle of Park Avenue in his chef’s uniform, holding a loaded hot dog before him with what appears to be genuine pleasure. The photograph suggests what DBGB makes plain: Mr. Boulud’s great genius is to be absolutely true both to the training and the underlying flavors of his French childhood and to the joys and pressures of being a New York businessman, always on the run. He has made being French the most American thing about him. This makes for good restaurants.
★★
299 Bowery (Houston Street),
East Village; (212) 933-5300.
 An open, vaguely industrial space combines the elegance of polished concrete, large mirrors and soft leather booths with the simple beauty of stacked boxes of restaurant supplies.
 Given all the stone and wire and glass, lower than you’d think.
 Appetizers: blood sausage; crispy tripe; veal tongues; iceberg salad; matzo-ball soup; more sausages. Main courses: Arctic char; lamb duo; more sausages.
 Totally acceptable selection, but much better to experiment among the 23 beers on tap and large selection of bottled beers that have traveled here from Britain, from Brooklyn, from Germany, from France.
 Dinner appetizers, $7 to $17; main courses, $14 to $26; prix fixe lunch, $22.
 Lunch: Tuesday to Friday, noon to 3 p.m. Brunch: Saturday and Sunday, 11 a.m. to 3 p.m. Dinner: Monday to Thursday, 5:30 p.m. to 12 a.m.; Friday and Saturday, 5:30 p.m. to 1 a.m.; Sunday, 5:30 to 11 p.m.
 Required for the main dining room. In the bar, you merely jump for the first open table you see.
 All major.
A long ramp leads from the street down to the bar and dining room. Bathrooms are wheelchair accessible.
 Ratings range from zero to four stars and reflect the reviewer’s reaction to food, ambience and service, with price taken into consideration. Menu listings and prices are subject to change.
