I AM not one to sneer at the manifest pleasures of a Wiener schnitzel. I have friends, however, who are not nearly so accepting of these simple joys.

They regard the Wiener schnitzel as too ordinary, the mundane low-risk equivalent of <dish>boneless chicken breasts</dish>. As impressive as a classic serving might be, its glistening, crenulated crust overhanging an enormous dish, the schnitzel strikes some as the enemy of the wider-ranging potential of Austrian cooking.

At Seäsonal, a small Austrian restaurant near Carnegie Hall with ambitions reaching beyond faithful reproductions of the classics, you will still find Wiener schnitzel. But you might not recognize it.

Rather than the flattened, breaded emblem of Germanic taverns everywhere, Seäsonal’s schnitzel arrives puffed up, as if it had been inflated with additional flavor, and perhaps a stiff helping of dignity as well. Though prideful, it is crisp and tender, tasting clearly of veal, and served with an orb of <dish>cucumber salad</dish> that offers more intensity than any cucumber has a right to, and potato salad that, alas, makes up for the boldness of the cucumber with reticence.

Continue reading the main story
RELATED COVERAGE

Seäsonal
Nonetheless, the schnitzel typifies the approach taken by the chefs, Wolfgang Ban and Eduard Frauneder, who opened Seäsonal a couple of years ago as a restaurant and a wine bar. Their main-course menu reads like a list of gemütlich Austrian favorites, easygoing, friendly dishes that were once more common in New York.

Yet as with the schnitzel, Seäsonal rips these dishes from their amber traps and takes them on a culinary journey unforeseen by more homey guardians of this cuisine.

It’s not an entirely new approach. Daniel Boulud, for one, took a pig’s foot and turned it into world-class cuisine, and he wasn’t the first to do that, either. The trick, when making gutsy peasant food decorous, is to augment the simple power of the flavors with subtleties and complexities. The aim is to amplify its character, not to conceal it.

This is one of the challenges of modern global gastronomy: How do you present regional cooking in new guises without stealing its character? At one extreme is utter simplicity: you exalt the familiar with the best possible ingredients, achieving surprise through sheer quality. At the other is molecular gastronomy, which, by disguising familiar ingredients and flavors, offers the thrill of tasting them anew. Seäsonal stakes out territory in the middle, combining fine ingredients and modern techniques in a demonstration of the benefits and flaws of its approach.

The restaurant itself is rectangular and plain, with neutral walls hung with paintings that at least suggest a touch of color, courtesy of a rotating array of artists. Seating is comfortable enough, unless you are near the door on a cold night, when icy winds knife in each time it opens. At the small bar, it is not unusual for travelers in the Austrian or German wine trade to stop in for a drink and conversation. I doubt you will find a better list of Austrian wines anywhere in New York, augmented by some excellent German selections. But it is fairly expensive, with little under $60.

Cooking
Daily inspiration, delicious recipes, and other updates from Sam Sifton and The New York Times, right to your inbox.


Enter your email address
 Sign Up

Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services.

SEE SAMPLE PRIVACY POLICY
Much of the food seems hyper-designed, almost sculptural, barely resembling the simple list of ingredients that constitute menu descriptions. In many ways, the appetizers, which offer the least resemblance to the familiar Austrian dishes, are the creative apex. In one dish, generous pieces of lobster arrive under a cluster of almost microscopic hen-of-the-woods <dish>mushrooms</dish>, pumpernickel crumbs and a <dish>soft-poached egg</dish>. Break the <dish>egg</dish>, swish it around, and you’ve got a lovely, savory little porridge.

A succulent cube of <dish>pork</dish> belly was so good that it had little need of its accompaniments, a <dish>potato purée</dish> and a sort of anchovy sauce. On my first visit, I enjoyed it but found little about it that seemed Austrian. By my third visit, the potato and anchovy had been traded in for mustard seeds and endive, which gave the dish a delicious Tyrolean accent. Veal sweetbreads were tender, with a crisp exterior, their earthy, butter flavor set off beautifully by a sweet-and-sour sauce.

<dish>Potato soup</dish> seems simple enough, just potato in a chicken consommé, but leeks and speck gave it a haunting smoky flavor worth savoring. <dish>Pumpkin soup</dish> one evening was equally captivating. It had just a suggestion of sweetness, while a halved scallop added richness and pumpkin seeds crunch and texture.

Each of these dishes had just a touch — pumpkin or mustard seeds here, vinegar there — that spoke to me of Austria. Not always the case with the main courses. Sauerbraten, really two dense circles of Wagyu beef with celery, potato and apple, was tender and delicious, but nothing about it suggested the sort of braised, tangy, sweet flavors I associate with the dish. As an aside, my late mother-in-law, a native of Berlin, made an excellent classic sauerbraten. Maybe I’m committed to hers. But still, Seäsonal’s version seemed disconnected.

Tender kaisergulasch, or veal cheeks, by contrast, offered the sort of sweet and spicy tension that I missed in the sauerbraten, while thick-cut slices of <dish>duck breast</dish>, rich and tender, flourished with sides of classically vinegary red cabbage, kohlrabi and poppy seeds. But tafelspitz, <dish>flatiron beef</dish> that was boiled and served in an oxtail consommé, was dispiritingly bland, not helped at all by its apple, horseradish and spinach condiments.

Ah, but you can always count on sweets in an Austrian restaurant, right? Yes and no. Yes to the straightforward apple strudel, delicate and cinnamony, and the classic kaiserschmarrn, caramelized pancakes that are crumbled and served with rum raisins. A qualified yes to the deconstructed <dish>Black Forest cake</dish>, served in layers in a glass tumbler. Even so, it remains a Black Forest cake. No to the deconstructed pumpkin cheesecake, also served in a tumbler. Well, I suppose you might feel differently if you like <dish>pumpkin cheesecake</dish>.

A brief word about the service: It is friendly, efficient and thorough, yet it also has a rote, stilted quality. As with many restaurants, Seäsonal feels compelled to announce each dish, list the ingredients and explain how it was cooked. No matter how engrossed you are in conversation, the servers will interrupt. It’s a perhaps inconsequential but disconcerting reminder of the occasional conflict between kitchen ambition and consumer satisfaction.

