Pizza Moto @ John Grace Bakery
Pizza
338 Hamilton Avenue,
718-834-6686
David Sclarow built his first wood-burning <dish>pizza</dish> oven so he could feed guests at the wedding of two
cheesemakers. They were getting married some distance from Brooklyn, where he lived, so he layered
the bricks and concrete on top of a flatbed trailer that he could hitch to the back of his
Volkswagen Doka. The next time he took his mobile pizza oven for a spin, it collapsed, but by that
point, he liked it so much that he rebuilt it. It was the second oven in which he started baking
small, irregular, alluringly blistered margheritas at the   in 2008. It caved in, too. This time Mr.
Sclarow got serious, engineering a steel-hulled model shaped like a Quonset hut. The third   oven
was stolen last year, but he still has three others designed along the same lines. Clearly Mr.
Sclarow is one of those chefs for whom half the fun is playing with fire, not to mention building
the fire and a heatproof structure to contain it. When he was ready to open a stationary pizzeria in
Brooklyn, a defunct Papa John’s where pizzas were made in a gas oven would not seem to have held
much appeal for him. Then he and his business partner, Anna Viertel, looked at the site, on the
grim, shadowy, underpopulated borderland between Carroll Gardens and Red Hook. Behind the back wall
was a large white-tiled oven from the late 19th or early 20th century, sealed up and long forgotten.
Would it take more than two years of restoration and modification to make the oven work again? Yes.
Would Mr. Sclarow and Ms. Viertel undertake most of the masonry, plumbing, welding and electrical
work themselves? Absolutely. Would there be a lot of red tape to cut through before the city would
grant permits, and the restaurant would open in October? You bet. A perfect location, in other
words. In the new restaurant, given the unwieldy full name  , Mr. Sclarow has room to stretch out.
He has an imaginative bunch of appetizers that aren’t bound by the conventions of pizzerias or even
Italian restaurants. Most are pretty good, but there’s more joy in the pizzas, which go well beyond
the limited varieties of <dish>single-serving pies</dish> that sustain the outdoor operation. Those are without a
doubt the best <dish>brick-oven pizzas</dish> a New Yorker can find in a schoolyard or park. But the pies at the
new restaurant don’t need any such qualification. Despite minor variability, the pies coming out of
the old bakery are already among the top tier of New York brick-oven pizzas. The pizzas have grown
to a 14-inch size you can share without scowling, and there are more of them. The <dish>clam pie</dish> is
something like a flat clam chowder: It’s topped with sliced potatoes and profoundly smoky bacon. But
what makes it hard to put down is the flavor of clams cooked in cream and white wine that suffuses
the whole thing. Another tomato-free pizza is a complex and compelling duet for cheese and fungus.
It starts with a restrained application of ricotta, fontina, pecorino and mozzarella, which are
covered with juicy, springy roasted mushrooms and feathery shaved raw ones. Tomato sauce underlies
the very good <dish>pepperoni pizza</dish> (it’s actually chorizo, slightly hotter, and tangy) and the “eggs in
hell” pizza, which has bacon and mozzarella arrayed around the cyclopean eye of a single sous-vide
egg. Chile oil makes the eggs in hell a more engaging bacon-and-eggs than the carbonara pizza, a
special whose four cheeses melded into a single, not very interesting white blanket. The crust is in
the modern Brooklyn-Neapolitan family exemplified by   and  . Other doughs have a more complex
flavor, but the one at Pizza Moto is far from bland. The highest bubbles on the sizable outer rim
are starting to go black, and there are patches of char on the base. The crust is sturdy, but not
brittle or tough. It crackles upon meeting your teeth, but its white interior is delicate, filled
with small air pockets. Crackle is the entire point of the nonconformist pie that’s sprinkled with
salt, pepper and rosemary, and shellacked with bacon fat. Essentially a <dish>hot-pork-drenched cracker</dish>,
it makes a superb appetizer if you can get over any narrow-minded hangups about eating two courses
of pizza. At any rate, it’s a better opening move than the freebie the kitchen sends out, a fried
lasagna noodle coated with powdered cheese, tomatoes and pizza seasonings. It sounds more
interesting than it is.
