hsid<dish></dish>hsid<dish></dish>hsid<dish></dish>hsid<dish></dish>The NoMad
American
1170 Broadway,
347-472-5660
CREATIVE people should never explain their process to anyone except their biographers, who care, and
their spouses, who have to listen. The rest of us ought to be left guessing. It’s difficult, for
instance, to give your full attention to a meal at the NoMad once you have read the interviews in
which Daniel Humm and Will Guidara, its ambitious young operators, talk about modeling the
restaurant on the Rolling Stones. They went through a branding exercise, writing down words that
defined the band (loose, alive, genuine, deliberate) and molding the restaurant’s identity around
them. Those words hang on a kitchen wall, not far from the enormous photo of Mick Jagger onstage,
one leg goose-stepped up to microphone level. Once you know all this, you keep looking around the
NoMad’s cluster of small, grandiose dining rooms thinking, “If this is supposed to be a night with
Mick and Keith, why am I eating dinner at 5:30, and where are the police?” True, there’s an
absinthe-fortified martini, the Turf Cocktail, that could easily become a habit, but it’s probably
not the kind described in “Sister Morphine.” And while the thin women at the next table have a
seen-it-all air, I doubt they have anything to teach Anita Pallenberg. If the “Sticky Fingers”
flashbacks are distracting to me, though, they seem to have been liberating to Mr. Humm and Mr.
Guidara. They run Eleven Madison Park, a restaurant that rose from the middling ranks, and kept
rising, and finally soared into world-class status. With a chance to do a second, larger, more
populist restaurant  , they could have taken the well-traveled route with a bistro or trattoria. You
know the model: <dish>steak frites</dish> or pasta with skillful knife work and tricky garnishes to prove the
chef’s fine-dining bona fides. Instead, they have done something rather novel and wonderful. The
NoMad takes recipes developed in Mr. Humm’s kitchen at Eleven Madison Park and translates them into
a more open and generous style. Dishes fastidiously set in place by surgical tweezers to create the
intimacy, delicacy and artfulness expected in a $125 four-course menu have been simplified, painted
with broader strokes in a more relaxed hand that suits à la carte dining. At Eleven Madison Park,
which earned four stars from The New York Times in   by Frank Bruni, Mr. Humm concentrates and
compresses suckling pig for about eight hours until it holds more flavor than any one piece of meat
should be able to contain. It is the enriched plutonium of pork. In its best-known version, the
<dish>suckling pig</dish> and its garnishes are arranged like two exclamation points running beneath a thin green
line of baby leeks. Vast stretches of the white plate are left vacant. The NoMad serves suckling
pig, too, but it is at the center of the plate, with pickled mustard seeds spooned over it and a
crown of dandelion leaves resting around it. The dish is vastly easier to produce, no doubt, and
does not scream, “Take my picture” quite as insistently. But it still looks grand and (let’s get to
what really matters here) it offers a new way to consume enriched plutonium of pork. <dish>Lobster</dish>, which
Mr. Humm prepares expertly and with never-ending variety at his flagship, was on the NoMad menu
recently as lobster minestrone — with  , string beans, peas and quills of handmade garganelli in a
light broth. Duck is here, too: not the whole roasted bird glazed with lavender honey and then
carved tableside, but flat slices of the breast, with pickled juniper berries and scrolls of shaved
pickled peaches. Color is splashed around with retina-filling gusto in Mr. Humm’s kitchen. A   of
strawberries, raspberries and roasted beets was supersaturated with ruby and garnet. Snap peas,
cherry tomatoes, carrots in two shades and cauliflower in three are planted upright in a dish of
shiny ice pebbles, the crudités tray treated as a botanical garden. And rarely have radish greens
made the visual impact they have when left on the ends of red radishes enrobed in a thin shell of
butter, like strawberries dipped in white chocolate. The colors, and much of the NoMad’s flavor,
result from the creative deployment of vegetables practiced by Mr. Humm and his chef de cuisine,
Abram Bissell. But if you have heard anything at all about the NoMad, you know that its signature
dish is a <dish>roast chicken</dish> for two accessorized only by white asparagus and the smallest swipe of
potato purée. Upstaged by the duck at Eleven Madison Park, here the chicken is the uncontested prima
donna, and heads swivel when it goes by.
